CHAPTER 4

Sl



Wuart sets one Southern town apart from another, or from a
Northern town or hamlet, or city high-rise? The answer must
be the experience shared between the unknowing majority (it)
and the knowing minority (you). All of childhood’s unan-
swered questions must finally be passed back to the town and
answered there. Heroes and bogey men, values and dislikes,
are first encountered and labeled in that early environment. In
later years they change faces, places and maybe races, tactics,
intensities and goals, but beneath those penetrable masks they
wear forever the stocking-capped faces of childhood.

Mr. McElroy, who lived in the big rambling house next to
the Store, was very tall and broad, and although the years had
eaten away the flesh from his shoulders, they had not, at the
time of my knowing him, gotten to his high stomach, or his
hands or feet.

He was the only Negro I knew, except for the school prin-
cipal and the visiting teachers, who wore matching pants and
jackets. When I learned that men’s clothes were sold like that
and called suits, | remember thinking that somebody had been




very bright, for it made men look less manly, less threatening
and a little more like women.

Mr. McElroy never laughed, and seldom smiled, and to
his credit was the fact that he liked to talk to Uncle Willie. He
never went to church, which Bailey and J] thought also proved
he was a very courageous person. How great it would be to
grow up like that, to be able to stare religion down, especially
living next door to a woman like Momma.

I watched him with the excitement of expecting him to do
anything at any time. I never tired of this, or became disap-
pointed or disenchanted with him, although from the perch of
age, I see him now as a very simple and uninteresting man
who sold patent medicine and tonics to the less sophisticated
people in towns (villages) surrounding the metropolis of
Stamps.

There seemed to be an understanding between Mr.
McElroy and Grandmother. This was obvious to us because
he never chased us off his land. In summer’s late sunshine I
often sat under the chinaberry tree in his yard, surrounded by
the bitter aroma of its fruit and lulled by the drone of flies that
fed on the berries. He sat in a slotted swing on his porch,
rocking in his brown three-piece, his wide Panama nodding
in time with the whir of insects.

One greeting a day was all that could be expected from
Mr. McElroy. After his “Good morning, child,” or “Good
afternoon, child,” he never said a word, even if I met him
again on the road in front of his house or down by the well, or
ran into him behind the house escaping in a game of hide-
and-seek.

He remained a mystery in my childhood. A man who

owned his land and the big many-windowed house with a

porch that clung to its sides all around the house. An indepen-
dent Black man. A near anachronism in Stamps.

Bailey was the greatest person in my world. And the fact
that he was my brother, my only brother, and I had no sisters
to share him with, was such good fortune that it made me
want to live a Christian life just to show God that I was
grateful. Where I was big, elbowy and grating, he was small,
graceful and smooth. When I was described by our playmates
as being shit color, he was lauded for his velvet-black skin. His
hair fell down in black curls, and my head was covered with
black steel wool. And yet he loved me.

When our elders said unkind things about my features
(my family was handsome to a point of pain for me), Bailey
would wink at me from across the room, and I knew that it
was a matter of time before he would take revenge. He would
allow the old ladies to finish wondering how on earth I came
about, then he would ask, in a voice like cooling bacon grease,
“Oh Mizeriz Coleman, how is your son? I saw him the other
day, and he looked sick enough to die.”

Aghast, the ladies would ask, “Die? From what? He ain't
sick.”

And ina voice oilier than the one before, he’d answer with
a straight face, “From the Uglies.”

1 would hold my laugh, bite my tongue, grit my teeth and
very seriously erase even the touch of a smile from my face.
Later, behind the house by the black-walnut tree, we'd laugh
and laugh and howl.

Bailey could count on very few punishments for his consis-
tently outrageous behavior, for he was the pride of the Hen-
derson/Johnson family.

His movements, as he was later to describe those of an
acquaintance, were activated with oiled precision. He was also




able to find more hours in the day than I thought existed. He
finished chores, homework, read more books than I and
played the group games on the side of the hill with the best of
them. He could even pray out loud in church, and was apt at
stealing pickles from the barrel that sat under the fruit
counter and Uncle Willie’s nose.

Once when the Store was full of lunchtime customers, he
dipped the strainer, which we also used to sift weevils from
meal and flour, into the barrel and fished for two fat pickles.
He caught them and hooked the strainer onto the side of the
barrel where they dripped until he was ready for them. When
the last school bell rang, he picked the nearly dry pickles out
of the strainer, jammed them into his pockets and threw the
strainer behind the oranges. We ran out of the Store. It was
summer and his pants were short, so the pickle juice made
clean streams down his ashy legs, and he jumped with his
pockets full of loot and his eyes laughing a “How about that?”
He smelled like a vinegar barrel or a sour angel.

After our early chores were done, while Uncle Willie or
Momma minded the Store, we were free to play the children’s
games as long as we stayed within yelling distance. Playing
hide-and-seek, his voice was easily identified, singing, “Last
night, night before, twenty-four robbers at my door. Who all

is hid? Ask me to let them in, hit ’em in the head with a

rolling pin. Who all is hid?” In follow the leader, naturally he
was the one who created the most daring and interesting
things to do. And when he was on the tail of the pop the whip,
he would twirl off the end like a top, spinning, falling, laugh-
ing, finally stopping just before my heart beat its last, and then
he was back in the game, still laughing.

Of all the needs (there are none imaginary) a lonely child
has, the one that must be satisfied, if there is going to be hope

and a hope of wholeness, is the unshaking need for an unshak-
able God. My pretty Black brother was my Kingdom Come.

IN Stamps the custom was to can everything that could pos-
sibly be preserved. During the killing season, after the first
frost, all neighbors helped each other to slaughter hogs and
even the quiet, big-eyed cows if they had stopped giving milk.

The missionary ladies of the Christian Methodist Epis-
copal Church helped Momma prepare the pork for sausage.
They squeezed their fat arms elbow deep in the ground meat,
mixed it with gray nose-opening sage, pepper and salt, and
made tasty little samples for all obedient children who
brought wood for the slick black stove. The men chopped off
the larger pieces of meat and laid them in the smokehouse to
begin the curing process. They opened the knuckle of the
hams with their deadly-looking knives, took out a certain
round harmless bone (“it could make the meat go bad”) and
rubbed salt, coarse brown salt that looked like fine gravel, into
the flesh, and the blood popped to the surface.

Throughout the year, until the next frost, we took our
meals from the smokehouse, the little garden that lay cousin-
close to the Store and from the shelves of canned foods. There
were choices on the shelves that could set a hungry child’s
mouth to watering. Green beans, snapped always the right
length, collards, cabbage, juicy red tomato preserves that came
into their own on steaming buttered biscuits, and sausage,
beets, berries and every fruit grown in Arkansas.

But at least twice yearly Momma would feel that as chil-
dren we should have fresh meat included in our diets. We
were then given money—pennies, nickels and dimes en-
trusted to Bailey—and sent to town to buy liver. Since the
whites had refrigerators, their butchers bought the meat from




commercial slaughterhouses in Texarkana and sold it to the
wealthy even in the peak of summer.

Crossing the Black area of Stamps which in childhood’s
Narrow measure seemed a whole word, we were obliged by
custom to stop and speak to every person we met, and Bailey
felt constrained to spend a few minutes playing with each
friend. There was a joy in going to town with money in our
pockets (Bailey’s pockets were as good as my own) and time
on our hands. But the pleasure fled when we reached the
white part of town. After we left Mr. Willie Williams’ Do
Drop Inn, the last stop before whitefolksville, we had to cross
the pond and adventure the railroad tracks. We were
explorers walking without weapons into man-eating animals’
territory.

In Stamps the segregation was so complete that most
Black children didn’t really, absolutely know what whites
looked like. Other than that they were different, to be
dreaded, and in that dread was included the hostility of the
powerless against the powerful, the poor against the rich, the
worker against the worked for and the ragged against the well
dressed.

I remember never believing that whites were really real.

Many women who worked in their kitchens traded at our
Store, and when they carried their finished laundry back to
town they often set the big baskets down on our front porch to
pull a singular piece from the starched collection and show
either how graceful was their ironing hand or how rich and
opulent was the property of their employers.

I looked at the items that weren’t on display. I knew, for
instance, that white men wore shorts, as Uncle Willie did, and
that they had an opening for taking out their “things” and
peeing, and that white women’s breasts weren’t built into

their dresses, as some people said, because I saw their
brassieres in the baskets. But I couldn’t force myself to think
of them as people. People were Mrs. LaGrone, Mrs. Hen-
dricks, Momma, Reverend Sneed, Lillie B, and Louise and
Rex. Whitefolks couldn’t be people because their feet were too
small, their skin too white and see-throughy, and they didn’t
walk on the balls of their feet the way people did—they
walked on their heels like horses.

People were those who lived on my side of town. I didn’t
like them all, or, in fact, any of them very much, but they were
people. These others, the strange pale creatures that lived
in their alien unlife, weren’t considered folks. They were

whitefolks.



