CHAPTER 23

et



THE children in Stamps trembled visibly with anticipation.
Some adults were excited too, but to be certain the whole
young population had come down with graduation epidemic.
Large classes were graduating from both the grammar school
and the high school. Even those who were years removed
from their own day of glorious release were anxious to help
with preparations as a kind of dry run, The junior students who
were moving into the vacating classes’ chairs were tradition-
bound to show their talents for leadership and management.
They strutted through the school and around the campus
exerting pressure on the lower grades. Their authority was so
new that occasionally if they pressed a little too hard it had to
be overlooked. After all, next term was coming, and it never
hurt a sixth grader to have a play sister in the eighth grade, or
a tenth-year student to be able to call a twelfth grader Bubba.
So all was endured in a spirit of shared understanding. But the
graduating classes themselves were the nobility. Like travelers
with exotic destinations on their minds, the graduates were
remarkably forgetful. They came to school without their

books, or tablets or even pencils. Volunteers fell over them-
selves to secure replacements for the missing equipment.
When accepted, the willing workers might or might not be
thanked, and it was of no importance to the pregraduation
rites. Even teachers were respectful of the now quiet and
aging seniors, and tended to speak to them, if not as equals, as
beings only slightly lower than themselves. After tests were
returned and grades given, the student body, which acted like
an extended family, knew who did well, who excelled, and
what piteous ones had failed.

Unlike the white high school, Lafayette County Training
School distinguished itself by having neither lawn, nor hedges,
nor tennis court, nor climbing ivy. Its two buildings (main
classrooms, the grade school and home economics) were set on
a dirt hill with no fence to limit either its boundaries or those of
bordering farms. There was a large expanse to the left of the
school which was used alternately as a baseball diamond or a
basketball court. Rusty hoops on the swaying poles represented
the permanent recreational equipment, although bats and balls
could be borrowed from the P. E. teacher if the borrower was
qualified and if the diamond wasn’t occupied.

Over this rocky area relieved by a few shady tall per-
simmon trees the graduating class walked. The girls often
held hands and no longer bothered to speak to the lower stu-
dents. There was a sadness about them, as if this old world
was not their home and they were bound for higher ground.
The boys, on the other hand, had become more friendly, more
outgoing. A decided change from the closed attitude they pro-
jected while studying for finals. Now they seemed not ready to
give up the old school, the familiar paths and classrooms. Only
a small percentage would be continuing on to college—one of
the South’s A & M (agricultrual and mechanical) schools,




which trained Negro youths to be carpenters, farmers,
handymen, masons, maids, cooks and baby nurses. Their
future rode heavily on their shoulders, and blinded them to
the collective joy that had pervaded the lives of the boys and
girls in the grammar school graduating class.

Parents who could afford it had ordered new shoes and
ready-made clothes for themselves from Sears and Roebuck or
Montgomery Ward. They also engaged the best seamstresses to
make the floating graduating dresses and to cut down second-
hand pants which would be pressed to a military slickness for
the important event.

Oh, it was important, all right. Whitefolks would attend
the ceremony, and two or three would speak of God and
home, and the Southern way of life, and Mrs. Parsons, the
principal’s, wife, would play the graduation march while the
lower-grade graduates paraded down the aisles and took their
seats below the platform. The high school seniors would wait
in empty classrooms to make their dramatic entrance.

IN the Store I was the person of the moment. The birthday
girl, The center. Bailey had graduated the year before,
although to do so he had had to forfeit all pleasures to make
up for his time lost in Baton Rouge.

- My class was wearing butter-yellow piqué dresses, and
Momma launched out on mine. She smocked the yoke into
tiny crisscrossing puckers, then shirred the rest of the bodice.
Her dark fingers ducked in and out of the lemony cloth as she
embroidered raised daisies around the hem. Before she con-
sidered herself finished she had added a crocheted cuff on the
puff sleeves, and a pointy crocheted collar.

I was going to be lovely. A walking model of all the
various styles of fine hand sewing and it didn’t worry me that

I was only twelve years old and merely graduating from the
eighth grade. Besides, many teachers in Arkansas Negro
schools had only that diploma and were licensed to impart
wisdom.

The days had become longer and more noticeable. The
faded beige of former times had been replaced with strong
and sure colors. I began to see my classmates’ clothes, their
skin tones, and the dust that waved off pussy willows. Clouds
that lazed across the sky were objects of great concern to me.
Their shiftier shapes might have held a message that in my
new happiness and with a little bit of time I’d soon decipher.
During that period I looked at the arch of heaven so reli-
giously my neck kept a steady ache. I had taken to smiling
more often, and my jaws hurt from the unaccustomed
activity. Between the two physical sore spots, I suppose I could
have been uncomfortable, but that was not the case. As a
member of the winning team (the graduating class of 1940) I
had outdistanced unpleasant sensations by miles. I was headed
for the freedom of open fields.

Youth and social approval allied themselves with me and
we trammeled memories of slights and insults. The wind of our
swift passage remodeled my features. Lost tears were pounded
to mud and then to dust. Years of withdrawal were brushed
aside and left behind, as hanging ropes of parasitic moss.

My work alone had awarded me a top place and I was
going to be one of the first called in the graduating ceremonies.
On the classroom blackboard, as well as on the bulletin board
in the auditorium, there were blue stars and white stars and red
stars. No absences, no tardinesses, and my academic work was
among the best of the year. I could say the preamble to the Con-
stitution even faster than Bailey. We timed ourselves often:
“Wethepeopleofthe UnitedStatesinordertoformamoreperfect-




union ...” J had memorized the Presidents of the United States
from Washington to Roosevelt in chronological as well as
alphabetical order.

My hair pleased me too. Gradually the black mass had
lengthened and thickened, so that it kept at last to its braided
pattern, and I didn’t have to yank my scalp off when I tried to
comb it.

Louise and I had rehearsed the exercises until we tired out
ourselves. Henry Reed was class valedictorian. He was a
small, very black boy with hooded eyes, and long, broad nose
and an oddly shaped head. I had admired him for years
because each term he and I vied for the best grades in our
class. Most often he bested me, but instead of being disap-
pointed I was pleased that we shared top places between us.
Like many Southern Black children, he lived with his grand-
mother, who was as strict as Momma and as kind as she knew
how to be. He was courteous, respectful and soft-spoken to
elders, but on the playground he chose to play the roughest
games. I admired him. Anyone, I reckoned, sufficiently afraid
or sufficiently dull could be polite. But to be able to operate at
a top level with both adults and children was admirable.

His valedictory speech was entitled “To Be or Not to Be.”
The rigid tenth-grade teacher had helped him write it. He’d
been working on the dramatic stresses for months.

The weeks until graduation were filled with heady activi-
ties. A group of small children were to be presented in a play
about buttercups and daisies and bunny rabbits. They could
be heard throughout the building practicing their hops and
their little songs that sounded like silver bells. The older girls
(nongraduates, of course) were assigned the task of making
refreshments for the night’s festivities. A tangy scent of
ginger, cinnamon, nutmeg and chocolate wafted around the

home economics building as the budding cooks made samples
for themselves and their teachers.

In every corner of the workshop, axes and saws split fresh
timber as the woodshop boys made sets and stage scenery.
Only the graduates were left out of the general bustle. We
were free to sit in the library at the back of the building or
look in quite detachedly, naturally, on the measures being
taken for our event.

Even the minister preached on graduation the Sunday
before. His subject was, “Let your light so shine that men will
see your good works and praise your Father, Who is in
Heaven.” Although the sermon was purported to be addressed
to us, he used the occasion to speak to backsliders, gamblers
and general ne’er-do-wells. But since he had called our names
at the beginning of the service we were mollified.

Among Negroes the tradition was to give presents to chil-
dren going only from one grade to another. How much more
important this was when the person was graduating at the top
of the class. Uncle Willie and Momma had sent away for a
Mickey Mouse watch like Bailey’s. Louise gave me four
embroidered handkerchiefs. (I gave her three crocheted
doilies.) Mrs. Sneed, the minister’s wife, made me an under-
skirt to wear for graduation, and nearly every customer gave
me a nickel or maybe even a dime with the instruction “Keep
on moving to higher ground,” or some such encouragement.

Amazingly the great day finally dawned and I was out of
bed before I knew it. I threw open the back door to see it more
clearly, but Momma said, “Sister, come away from that door
and put your robe on.”

I hoped the memory of that morning would never leave
me. Sunlight was itself still young, and the day had none of
the insistence maturity would bring it in a few hours. In my




robe and barefoot in the backyard, under cover of going to see
about my new beans, I gave myself up to the gentle warmth
and thanked God that no matter what evil I had done in my
life He had allowed me to live to see this day. Somewhere in
my fatalism I had expected to die, accidentally, and never have
the chance to walk up the stairs in the auditorium and grace-
fully receive my hard-earned diploma. Out of God’s merciful
bosom I had won reprieve.

Bailey came out in his robe and gave me a box wrapped in
Christmas paper. He said he had saved his money for months
to pay for it. It felt like a box of chocolates, but I knew Bailey
wouldn’t save money to buy candy when we had all we could
want under our noses.

He was as proud of the gift as I. It was a soft-leather-
bound copy of a collection of poems by Edgar Allan Poe, or, as
Bailey and I called him, “Eap.” I turned to “Annabel Lee” and
we walked up and down the garden rows, the cool dirt
between our toes, reciting the beautifully sad lines.

Momma made a Sunday breakfast although it was only
Friday. After we finished the blessing, I opened my eyes to
find the watch on my plate. It was a dream of a day. Every-
thing went smoothly and to my credit. I didn’t have to be
reminded or scolded for anything. Near evening I was too jit-
tery to attend to chores, so Bailey volunteered to do all before
his bath,

Days before, we had made a sign for the Store, and as we
turned out the lights Momma hung the cardboard over the
doorknob. It read clearly: cLosep. GRADUATION.

My dress fitted perfectly and everyone said that I looked
like a sunbeam in it. On the hill, going toward the school,
Bailey walked behind with Uncle Willie, who muttered, “Go
on, Ju.” He wanted him to walk ahead with us because it

embarrassed him to have to walk so slowly. Bailey said he’d let
the ladies walk together, and the men would bring up the
rear. We all laughed, nicely,

Little children dashed by out of the dark like fireflies.
Their crepe-paper dresses and butterfly wings were not made
for running and we heard more than one rip, dryly, and the
regretful “uh uh” that followed.

The school blazed without gaiety. The windows seemed
cold and unfriendly from the lower hill. A sense of ill-fated
tuming crept over me, and if Momma hadn’t reached for my
hand I would have drifted back to Bailey and Uncle Willie,
and possibly beyond. She made a few slow jokes about my feet
getting cold, and tugged me along to the now-strange
building.

Around the front steps, assurance came back. There were
my fellow “greats,” the graduating class. Hair brushed back,
legs oiled, new dresses and pressed pleats, fresh pocket hand-
kerchiets and little handbags, all homesewn. Oh, we were up
to snuff, all right. I joined my comrades and didn’t even see
my family go in to find seats in the crowded auditorium.

The school band struck up a march and all classes filed in
as had been rehearsed. We stood in front of our seats, as
assigned, and on a signal from the choir director, we sat. No
sooner had this been accomplished than the band started to
play the national anthem. We rose again and sang the song,
after which we recited the pledge of allegiance. We remained
standing for a brief minute before the choir director and the
principal signaled to us, rather desperately I thought, to take
our seats. The command was so unusual that our carefully
rehearsed and smooth-running machine was thrown off. For
a full minute we fumbled for our chairs and bumped into each
other awkwardly. Habits change or solidify under pressure, so




in our state of nervous tension we had been ready to follow
our usual assembly pattern: the American national anthem,
then the pledge of allegiance, then the song every Black
person I knew called the Negro National Anthem. All done in
the same key, with the same passion and most often standing
on the same foot.

Finding my seat at least, I was overcome with a presenti-
ment of worse things to come. Something unrehearsed,
unplanned, was going to happen, and we were going to be
made to look bad. I distinctly remember being explicit in the
choice of pronoun. It was “we,” the graduating class, the unit,
that concerned me then.

The principal welcomed “parents and friends” and asked
the Baptist minister to lead us in prayer. His invocation was
brief and punchy, and for a second I thought we were getting
back on the high read to right action. When the principal
came back to the dais, however, his voice had changed.
Sounds always affected me profoundly and the principal’s
voice was one of my favorites. During assembly it melted and
lowed weakly into the audience. It had not been in my plan to
listen to him, but my curiosity was piqued and I straightened
up to give him my attention.

He was talking about Booker T. Washington, our “late
great leader,” who said we can be as close as the fingers on the
hand, etc. ... Then he said a few vague things about friend-
ship and the friendship of kindly people to those less fortunate
than themselves. With that his voice nearly faded, thin, away.
Like a river diminishing to a stream and then toa trickle. But
he cleared his throat and said, “Our speaker tonight, who is
also our friend, came from Texarkana to deliver the com-
mencement address, but due to the irregularity of the train
schedule, he’s going to, as they say, ‘speak and run.’ ” He said

that we understood and wanted the man to know that we
were most grateful for the time he was able to give us and then
something about how we were willing always to adjust to
another’s program, and without more ado—“I give you Mr.
Edward Donleavy.”

Not one but two white men came through the door off-
stage. The shorter one walked to the speaker’s platform, and
the tall one moved over to the center seat and sat down. But
that was our principal’s seat, and already occupied. The dis-
lodged gentleman bounced around for a long breath or two
before the Baptist minister gave him his chair, then with more
dignity than the situation deserved, the minister walked off
the stage.

Donleavy looked at the audience once (on reflection, ’'m
sure that he wanted only to reassure himself that we were
really there), adjusted his glasses and began to read from a
sheat of papers.

He was glad “to be here and to see the work going on just
as it was in the other schools.”

At the first “Amen” from the audience I willed the
offender to immediate death by choking on the word. But
Amens and Yes, sir’s began to fall around the room like rain
through a ragged umbrella.

He told us of the wonderful changes we children in
Stamps had in store. The Central School (naturally, the white
school was Central) had already been granted improvements
that would be in use in the fall. A well-known artist was
coming from Little Rock to teach art to them. They were
going to have the newest microscopes and chemistry equip-
ment for their laboratory. Mr. Donleavy didn’t leave us long

in the dark over who made these improvements available to




Central High. Nor were we to be ignored in the general bet-
terment scheme he had in mind.

He said that he had pointed out to people at a very high
level that one of the first-line football tacklers at Arkansas
Agricultural and Mechanical College had graduated from
good old Lafayette County Training School. Here fewer
Amen’s were heard. Those few that did break through lay
dully in the air with the heaviness of habit.

He went on to praise us. He went on to say how he had
bragged that “one of the best basketball players at Fisk sank
his first ball right here at Lafayette County Training School.”

The white kids were going to have a chance to become
Galileos and Madame Curies and Edisons and Gauguins, and
our boys (the girls weren’t even in on it) would try to be Jesse
Owenses and Joe Louises.

Owens and the Brown Bomber were great heroes in our
world, but what school official in the white-goddom of Little
Rock had the right to decide that those two men must be our
only heroes? Who decided that for Henry Reed to become a
scientist he had to work like George Washington Carver, asa
bootblack, to buy a lousy microscope? Bailey was obviously
always going to be too small to be an athlete, so which con-
crete angel glued to what country seat had decided that if my
brother wanted to become a lawyer he had to first pay penance
for his skin by picking cotton and hoeing corn and studying
correspondence books at night for twenty years?

The man’s dead words fell like bricks around the audito-
rium and too many settled in my belly. Constrained by hard-
learned manners I couldn’t look behind me, but to my left and
right the proud graduating class of 1940 had dropped their
heads. Every girl in my row had found something new to do
with her handkerchief. Some folded the tiny squares into love

knots, some into triangles, but most were wadding them, then
pressing them flat on their yellow laps.

On the dais, the ancient tragedy was being replayed. Pro-
fessor Parsons sat, a sculptor’s reject, rigid. His large, heavy
body seemed devoid of will or willingness, and his eyes said he
was no longer with us. The other teachers examined the flag
(which was draped stage right) or their notes, or the windows
which opened on our now-famous playing diamond.

Graduation, the hush-hush magic time of frills and gifts
and congratulations and diplomas, was finished for me before
my name was called. The accomplishment was nothing. The
meticulous maps, drawn in three colors of ink, learning and
spelling decasyllabic words, memorizing the whole of The Rape
of Lucrece—it was for nothing. Donleavy had exposed us.

We were maids and farmers, handymen and washer-
women, and anything higher that we aspired to was farcical
and presumptuous.

Then I wished that Gabriel Prosser and Nat Turner had
killed all whitefolks in their beds and that Abraham Lincoln
had been assassinated before the signing of the Emancipation
Proclamation, and that Harriet Tubman had been killed by
that blow on her head and Christopher Columbus had
drowned in the Santa Maria.

It was awful to be Negro and have no control over my life.
It was brutal to be young and already trained to sit quietly and
listen to charges brought against my color with no chance of
defense. We should all be dead. I thought I should like to see
us all dead, one on top of the other. A pyramid of flesh with
the whitefolks on the bottom, as the broad base, then the
Indians with their silly tomahawks and teepees and wigwams
and treaties, the Negroes with their mops and recipes and
cotton sacks and spirituals sticking out of their mouths. The




Dutch children should all stumble in their wooden shoes and
break their necks. The French should choke to death on the
Louisiana Purchase (1803) while silk worms ate all the Chinese
with their stupid pigtails. As a species, we were an abomina-
tion. All of us.

Donleavy was running for election, and assured our par-
ents that if he won we could count on having the only colored
paved playing field in that part of Arkansas. Also—he never
looked up to acknowledge the grunts of acceptance—also, we
were bound to get some new equipment for the home eco-
nomics building and the workshop.

He finished, and since there was no need to give any more
than the most perfunctory thank-you’s, he nodded to the men
on the stage, and the tall white man who was never intro-
duced joined him at the door. They left with the attitude that
now they were off to something really important. (The
graduation ceremonies at Lafayette County Training School
had been a mere preliminary.)

The ugliness they left was palpable. An uninvited guest
who wouldn’t leave. The choir was summoned and sang a
modern arrangement of “Onward, Christian Soldiers,” with
new words pertaining to graduates secking their place in the
world. But it didn’t work. Elouise, the daughter of the Baptist
minister, recited “Invictus,” and I could have cried at the
impertinence of “I am the master of my fate, I am the captain
of my soul.”

My name had lost its ring of familiarity and I had to be
nudged to go and receive my diploma. All my preparations
had fled. I neither marched up to the stage like a conquering
Amazon, nor did I look in the audience for Bailey’s nod of
approval. Marguerite Johnson, I heard the name again, my

honors were read, there were noises in the audience of appre-
ciation, and I took my place on the stage as rehearsed.

I thought about colors I hated: ecru, puce, lavender, beige
and black.

There was shuffling and rustling around me, then Henry
Reed was giving his valedictory address, “To Be or Not to
Be.” Hadn't he heard the whitefolks? We couldn’t de, so the
question was a waste of time. Henry’s voice came out clear
and strong. I feared to look at him. Hadn’t he got the mes-
sage? There was no “nobler in the mind” for Negroes because
the world didn’t think we had minds, and they let us know it.
“Outrageous fortune”? Now, that was a joke. When the cere-
mony was over I had to tell Henry Reed some things. That is,
if I still cared. Not “rub,” Henry, “erase.” “Ah, there’s the
erase.” Us.

Henry had been a good student in elocution. His voice
rose on tides of promise and fell on waves of warnings. The
English teacher had helped him to create a sermon winging
through Hamlet’s soliloquy. To be a man, a doer, a builder, a
leader, or to be a tool, an unfunny joke, a crusher of funky
toadstools. I marveled that Henry could go through with the
speech as if we had a choice. .

I had been listening and silently rebutting each sentence
with my eyes closed; then there was a hush, which in an audi-
ence warns that something unplanned is happening. I looked
up and saw Henry Reed, the conservative, the proper, the A
student, turn his back to the audience and turn to us (the
proud graduating class of 1940) and sing, nearly speaking,

“Lift ev’ry voice and sing
Till earth and heaven ring
Ring with the harmonies of Liberty .. .”




IT was the poem written by James Weldon Johnson. It was the
music composed by J. Rosamond Johnson. It was the Negro
national anthem. Out of habit we were singing it.

Our mothers and fathers stood in the dark hall and joined
the hymn of encouragement. A kindergarten teacher led the
small children onto the stage and the buttercups and daisies
and bunny rabbits marked time and tried to follow:

“Stony the road we trod

Bitter the chastening rod

Felt in the days when hope, unborn, had died.
Yet with a steady beat

Have not our weary feet

Come to the place for which our fathers sighed?”

Every child I knew had learned that song with his ABC’s and
along with “Jesus Loves Me This I know.” But I personally
had never heard it before. Never heard the words, despite the
thousands of times I had sung them. Never thought they had
anything to do with me.

On the other hand, the words of Patrick Henry had made
such an impression on me that I had been able to stretch
myself tall and trembling and say, “I know not what course
others may take, but as for me, give me liberty or give me
death.”

And now I heard, really for the first time:

“We have come over a way that with tears
has been watered,

“Lift Ev’ry Voice and Sing”——-words by James Weldon Johnson and music
by J. Rosamond Johnson. Copyright by Edward B. Marks Music Corpora-
tion. Used by permission.

We have come, treading our path through
the blood of the slaughtered.”

WHILE echoes of the song shivered in the air, Henry Reed
bowed his head, said “Thank you,” and returned to his place
in the line. The tears that slipped down many faces were not
wiped away in shame.

We were on top again. As always, again. We survived.
The depths had been icy and dark, but now a bright sun spoke
to our souls. I was no longer simply a member of the proud
graduating class of 1940; I was a proud member of the won-
derful, beautiful Negro race.

Oh, Black known and unknown poets, how often have
your auctioned pains sustained us? Who will compute the
lonely nights made less lonely by your songs, or by the empty
pots made less tragic by your tales?

If we were a people much given to revealing secrets, we
might raise monuments and sacrifice to the memories of our
poets, but slavery cured us of that weakness. It may be
enough, however, to have it said that we survive in exact rela-
tionship to the dedication of our poets (include preachers,
musicians and blues singers). °



