CHAPTER 16

Sy



RECENTLY a white woman from Texas, who would quickly
describe herself as a liberal, asked me about my hometown.
When I told her that in Stamps my grandmother had owned
the only Negro general merchandise store since the turn of the
century, she exclaimed, “Why, you were a debutante.” Ridicu-
lous and even ludicrous. But Negro girls in small Southern
towns, whether poverty-stricken or just munching along ona
few of life’s necessities, were given as extensive and irrelevant
preparations for adulthood as rich white girls shown in maga-
zines. Admittedly the training was not the same. While white
girls learned to waltz and sit gracefully with a tea cup bal-
anced on their knees, we were lagging behind, learning the
mid-Victorian values with very little money to indulge them.
(Come and see Edna Lomax spending the money she made
picking cotton on five balls of ecru tatting thread. Her fingers
are bound to snag the work and she’ll have to repeat the
stitches time and time again. But she knows that when she
buys the thread.)

We were required to embroider and I had trunkfuls of




colored dishtowels, pillowcases, runners and handkerchiefs to
my credit. I mastered the art of crocheting and tatting, and
there was a lifetime’s supply of dainty doilies that would never
be used in sacheted dresser drawers. It went without saying
that all girls could iron and wash, but the finer touches around
the home, like setting a table with real silver, baking roasts
and cooking vegetables without meat, had to be learned else-
where. Usually at the source of those habits. During my tenth
year, a white woman’s kitchen became my finishing school.

Mrs. Viola Cullinan was a plump woman who lived in a
three-bedroom house somewhere behind the post office. She
was singularly unattractive until she smiled, and then the lines
around her eyes and mouth which made her look perpetually
dirty disappeared, and her face looked like the mask of an
impish elf. She usually rested her smile until late afternoon
when her women friends dropped in and Miss Glory, the
cook, served them cold drinks on the closed-in porch.

The exactness of her house was inhuman. This glass went
here and only here. That cup had its place and it was an act of
impudent rebellion to place it anywhere else. At twelve
o'clock the table was set. At 12:15 Mrs. Cullinan sat down to
dinner (whether her husband had arrived or not). At 12:16
Miss Glory brought out the food.

-. Tt took me a week to learn the difference between a salad
plate, a bread plate and a dessert plate.

Mrs. Cullinan kept up the tradition of her wealthy par-
ents. She was from Virginia. Miss Glory, who was a descen-
dant of slaves that had worked for the Cullinans, told me her
history. She had married beneath her (according to Miss
Glory). Her husband’s family hadn’t had their money very
long and what they had “didn’t ’mount to much.”

As ugly as she was, I thought privately, she was lucky to

get a husband above or beneath her station. But Miss Glory
wouldn’t let me say a thing against her mistress. She was very
patient with me, however, over the housework. She explained
the dishware, silverware and servants’ bells.

The large round bowl in which soup was served wasn’t a
soup bowl, it was a tureen. There were goblets, sherbet
glasses, ice-cream glasses, wine glasses, green glass coffee cups
with matching saucers, and water glasses. I had a glass to
drink from, and it sat with Miss Glory’s on a separate shelf
from the others. Soup spoons, gravy boat, butter knives, salad
forks and carving platter were additions to my vocabulary and
in fact almost represented a new language. I was fascinated
with the novelty, with the fluttering Mrs. Cullinan and her
Alice-in-Wonderland house.

Her husband remains, in my memory, undefined. I
lumped him with all the other white men that I had ever seen
and tried not to see.

On our way home one evening, Miss Glory told me that
Mrs. Cullinan couldn’t have children. She said that she was
too delicate-boned. It was hard to imagine bones at all under
those layers of fat. Miss Glory went on to say that the doctor
had taken out all her lady organs. I reasoned that a pig’s
organs included the lungs, heart and liver, so if Mrs. Cullinan
was walking around without those essentials, it explained why
she drank alcohol out of unmarked bottles. She was keeping
herself embalmed.

When I spoke to Bailey about it, he agreed that I was
right, but he also informed me that Mr. Cullinan had two
daughters by a colored lady and that I knew them very well.
He added that the girls were the spitting image of their father.
I was unable to remember what he looked like, although I had
just left him a few hours before, but I thought of the Coleman




girls. They were very light-skinned and certainly didn’t look
very much like their mother (no one ever mentioned Mr.
Coleman).

My pity for Mrs. Cullinan preceded me the next morning
like the Cheshire cat’s smile. Those girls, who could have been
her daughters, were beautiful. They didn’t have to straighten
their hair. Even when they were caught in the rain, their braids
still hung down straight like tamed snakes. Their mouths were
pouty little cupid’s bows. Mrs. Cullinan didn’t know what she
missed. Or maybe she did. Poor Mrs. Cullinan.

For weeks after, I arrived early, left late and tried very
hard to make up for her barrenness. If she had had her own
children, she wouldn’t have had to ask me to run a thousand
errands from her back door to the back door of her friends.
Poor old Mrs. Cullinan.

Then one evening Miss Glory told me to serve the ladies
on the porch. After I set the tray down and turned toward the
kitchen, one of the women asked, “What's your name, girl?”
It was the speckled-faced one. Mrs. Cullinan said, “She
doesn’t talk much. Her name’s Margaret.”

“Is she dumb?”

“No. As I understand it, she can talk when she wants
to but she’s usually quiet as a little mouse. Aren’t you,
Margaret?”

I smiled at her. Poor thing. No organs and couldn't even
pronounce my name correctly.

“She’s a sweet little thing, though.”

“Well, that may be, but the name’s too long. I’'d never
bother myself. I’d call her Mary if I was you.”

I fumed into the kitchen. That horrible woman would
never have the chance to call me Mary because if I was
starving I’d never work for her. I decided I wouldn't pee on

her if her heart was on fire. Giggles drifted in off the porch
and into Miss Glory’s pots. I wondered what they could be
laughing about.

Whitefolks were so strange. Could they be talking about
me? Everybody knew that they stuck together better than the
Negroes did. It was possible that Mrs. Cullinan had friends in
St. Louis who heard about a girl from Stamps being in court
and wrote to tell her. Maybe she knew about Mr. Freeman.

My lunch was in my mouth a second time and I went out-
side and relieved myself on the bed of four-o’clocks, Miss
Glory thought I might be coming down with something and
told me to go on home, that Momma would give me some
herb tea, and she’d explain to her mistress.

I realized how foolish I was being before I reached the
pond, Of course Mrs. Cullinan didn’t know. Otherwise she
wouldn't have given me the two nice dresses that Momma cut
down, and she certainly wouldn’t have called me a “sweet
little thing.” My stomach felt fine, and I didn’t mention any-
thing to Momma.

That evening I decided to write a poem on being white,
fat, old and without children. It was going to be a tragic
ballad. I would have to watch her carefully to capture the
essence of her loneliness and pain.

The very next day, she called me by the wrong name. Miss
Glory and I were washing up the lunch dishes when Mrs. Cul-
linan came to the doorway. “Mary?”

Miss Glory asked, “Who?”

Mrs. Cullinan, sagging a little, knew and I knew. “I want
Mary to go down to Mrs. Randall’s and take her some soup.
She’s not been feeling well for a few days.”

Miss Glory’s face was a wonder to see. “You mean Mar-
garet, ma’am. Her name’s Margaret.”




“That's too long. She’s Mary from now on. Heat that soup
from last night and put it in the china tureen and, Mary, I
want you to carry it carefully.”

Every person I knew had a hellish horror of being “called
out of his name.” It was a dangerous practice to call a Negro
anything that could be loosely construed as insulting because
of the centuries of their having been called niggers, jigs,
dinges, blackbirds, crows, boots and spooks.

Miss Glory had a fleeting second of feeling sorry for me.
Then as she handed me the hot tureen she said, “Don’t mind,
don’t pay that no mind. Sticks and stones may break your
bones, but words ... You know, I been working for her for
twenty years.”

She held the back door open for me. “Twenty years. I
wasn’t much older than you. My name used to be Hallelujah.
That’s what Ma named me, but my mistress give me ‘Glory,’
and it stuck. I likes it better too.”

I was in the little path that ran behind the houses when
Miss Glory shouted, “It’s shorter too.”

For a few seconds it was a tossup over whether I would
laugh (imagine being named Hallelujah) or cry (imagine let-
ting some white woman rename you for her convenience). My
anger saved me from either outburst. I had to quit the job, but
the problem was going to be how to do it. Momma wouldn’t
allow me to quit for just any reason.

“She’s a peach. That woman is a real peach.” Mrs. Ran-
dall’s maid was talking as she took the soup from me, and ]
wondered what her name used to be and what she answered
to now.

For a week I looked into Mrs. Cullinan’s face as she called
me Mary. She ignored my coming late and leaving early. Miss
Glory was a little annoyed because I had begun to leave egg

yolk on the dishes and wasn’t putting much heart in polishing
the silver. I hoped that she would complain to our boss, but
she didn’t.

Then Bailey solved my dilemma. He had me describe the
contents of the cupboard and the particular plates she liked
best. Her favorite piece was a casserole shaped like a fish and
the green glass coffee cups. I kept his instructions in mind, so
on the next day when Miss Glory was hanging out clothes and
I had again been told to serve the old biddies on the porch, I
dropped the empty serving tray. When I heard Mrs. Cullinan
scream, “Mary!” I picked up the casserole and two of the
green glass cups in readiness. As she rounded the kitchen door
I let them fall on the tiled floor. ‘

I could never absolutely describe to Bailey what happened
next, because each time I got to the part where she fell on the
floor and screwed up her ugly face to cry, we burst out
laughing. She actually wobbled around on the floor and
picked up shards of the cups and cried, “Oh, Momma. Oh,
dear Gawd. It’s Momma’s china from Virginia. Oh, Momma,
I sorry.”

Miss Glory came running in from the yard and the
women from the porch crowded around. Miss Glory was
almost as broken up as her mistress. “You mean to say she
broke our Virginia dishes? What we gone do?”

Mrs. Cullinan cried louder, “That clumsy nigger. Clumsy
little black nigger.”

Old speckled-face leaned down and asked, “Who did it,
Viola? Was it Mary? Who did it?”

Everything was happening so fast I can’t remember
whether her action preceded her words, but I know that Mrs.
Cullinan said, “Her name’s Margaret, goddamn it, her name’s
Margaret!” And she threw a wedge of the broken plate at me.




Tt could have been the hysteria which put her aim off, but the

flying crockery caught Miss Glory right over her ear and she
started screaming.

I left the front door wide open so all the neighbors
could hear.

Mrs. Cullinan was right about one thing. My name
wasn’t Mary,

