CHAPTER 6

Se



Reverend Howard Thomas was the presiding elder over a
district in Arkansas that included Stamps. Every three months
he visited our church, stayed at Momma’s over the Saturday
night and preached a loud passionate sermon on Sunday. He
collected the money that had been taken in over the preceding
months, heard reports from all the church groups and shook
hands with the adults and kissed all small children. Then he
went away. (I used to think that he went west to heaven, but
Momma straightened me out. He just went to Texarkana.)

Bailey and I hated him unreservedly. He was ugly, fat,
and he laughed like a hog with the colic. We were able to
make each other burst with giggling when we did imitations
of the thick-skinned preacher. Bailey was especially good at it.
He could imitate Reverend Thomas right in front of Uncle
Willie and never get caught because he did it soundlessly. He
puffed out his cheeks until they looked like wet brown stones,
and wobbled his head from side to side. Only he and I knew it,
but that was old Reverend Thomas to a tee.

His obesity, while disgusting, was not enough to incur the






intense hate that we felt for him. The fact that he never both-
ered to remember our names was insulting, but neither was
that slight, alone, enough to make us despise him. But the
crime that tipped the scale and made our hate not only just but
imperative was his actions at the dinner table. He ate the
biggest, brownest and best parts of the chicken at every
Sunday meal.

The only good thing about his visits was the fact that he
always arrived late on Saturday nights, after we had had
dinner. I often wondered if he tried to catch us at the table. I
believe so, for when he reached the front porch his little eyes
would glitter toward the empty dining room and his face
would fall with disappointment. Then immediately, a thin
curtain would fall over his features and he’d laugh a few
barks, “Uh, huh, uh, huh, Sister Henderson, just like a penny
with a hole in it, I always turn up.”

Right on cue every time, Momma would answer, “That’s
right, Elder Thomas, thank the blessed Jesus, come right in.”

He’d step in the front door and put down his Gladstone
(that’s what he called it) and look around for Bailey and me.
Then he opened his awful arms and groaned, “Suffer little
children to come unto me, for such is the Kingdom of
Heaven.”

Bailey went to him each time with his hand stretched out,
ready for a manly handshake, but Reverend Thomas would
push away the hand and encircle my brother for a few sec-
onds. “You still a boy, buddy. Remember that. They tell me
the Good Book say, ‘When I was a child I spake as a child, I
thought as a child, but when I became a man, I put away
childish things.’” Only then would he open his arms and
release Bailey.

I never had the nerve to go up to him. I was quite afraid

that if T tried to say, “Hello, Reverend Thomas,” I would
choke on the sin of mocking him. After all, the Bible did say,
“God is not mocked,” and the man was God’s representative.
He used to say to me, “Come on, little sister. Come and get
this blessing.” But I was so afraid and I also hated him so
much that my emotions mixed themselves up and it was
enough to start me crying. Momma told him time after time,
“Don’t pay her no mind, Elder Thomas, you know how
tender-hearted she is.”

He ate the leftovers from our dinner and he and Uncle
Willie discussed the developments of the church programs.
They talked about how the present minister was attending to
his flock, who got married, who died and how many children
had been born since his last visit.

Bailey and I stood like shadows in the rear of the Store
near the coal-oil tank, waiting for the juicy parts. But when
they were ready to talk about the latest scandal, Momma sent
us to her bedroom with warnings to have our Sunday School
lesson perfectly memorized or we knew what we could
expect.

We had a system that never failed. I would sit in the big
rocking chair by the stove and rock occasionally and stamp my
feet. ] changed voices, now soft and girlish, then a little deeper
like Bailey’s. Meanwhile, he would creep back into the Store.
Many times he came flying back to sit on the bed and to hold
the open lesson book just before Momma suddenly filled the
doorway.

“You children get your lesson good, now. You know all
the other children looks up to you all.” Then, as she turned
back into the Store Bailey followed right on her footsteps to
crouch in the shadows and listen for the forbidden gossip.

Once, he heard how Mr. Coley Washington had a girl




from Lewisville staying in his house. I didn’t think that was so
bad, but Bailey explained that Mr. Washington was probably
“doing it” to her. He said that although “it” was bad just about
everybody in the world did it to somebody, but no one else
was supposed to know that. And once, we found out about a
man who had been killed by whitefolks and thrown into the
pond. Bailey said the man’s things had been cut off and put in
his pocket and he had been shot in the head, all because the
whitefolks said he did “it” toa white woman.

Because of the kinds of news we filched from those
hushed conversations, I was convinced that whenever Rev-
erend Thomas came and Momma sent us to the back room
they were going to discuss whitefolks and “doing it.” Two
subjects about which I was very dim.

On Sunday mornings Momma served a breakfast that was
geared to hold us quiet from 9:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. She fried thick
pink slabs of home-cured ham and poured the grease over
sliced red tomatoes. Eggs over easy, fried potatoes and onions,
yellow hominy and crisp perch fried so hard we would pop
them in our mouths and chew bones, fins and all. Her cathead
biscuits were at least three inches in diameter and two inches
thick. The trick to eating catheads was to get the butter on
them before they got cold—then they were delicious. When,

-unluckily, they were allowed to get cold, they tended to a

gooeyness, not unlike a wad of tired gum.

We were able to reaffirm our findings on the catheads
each Sunday that Reverend Thomas spent with us. Naturally
enough, he was asked to bless the table. We would all stand;
my uncle, leaning his walking stick against the wall, would
lean his weight on the table. Then Reverend Thomas would
begin. “Blessed Father, we thank you this morning ...” and
on and on and on. I’d stop listening after a while until Bailey

kicked me and then I cracked my lids to see what had
promised to be a meal that would make any Sunday proud.
But as the Reverend droned on and on and on to a God who!
thought must be bored to hear the same things over and over
again, I saw that the ham grease had turned white on the
tomatoes. The eggs had withdrawn from the edge of the
platter to bunch in the center like children left out in the cold.
And the catheads had sat down on themselves with the con-
clusiveness of a fat woman sitting in an easy chair. And still he
talked on. When he finally stopped, our appetites were gone,
but he feasted on the cold food with a non-talking but still
noisy relish.

In the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church the chil-
dren’s section was on the right, cater-cornered from the pew
that held those ominous women called the Mothers of the
Church. In the young people’s section the benches were placed
close together, and when a child’s legs no longer comfortably
fitted in the narrow space, it was an indication to the elders
that that person could now move into the intermediate area
(center church). Bailey and I were allowed to sit with the other
children only when there were informal meetings, church
socials or the like. But on the Sundays when Reverend
Thomas preached, it was ordained that we occupy the first
row, called the mourners’ bench. I thought we were placed in
front because Momma was proud of us, but Bailey assured me
that she just wanted to keep her grandchildren under her
thumb and eye.

Reverend Thomas took his text from Deuteronomy. And
I was stretched between loathing his voice and wanting to
listen to the sermon. Deuteronomy was my favorite book in
the Bible. The laws were so absolute, so clearly set down, that
I knew if a person truly wanted to avoid hell and brimstone,




and being roasted forever in the devil’s fire, all she had to do
was memorize Deuteronomy and follow its teaching, word
for word. I also liked the way the word rolled off the tongue.

Bailey and I sat alone on the front bench, the wooden slats
pressing hard on our behinds and the backs of our thighs. I
would have wriggled just a bit, but each time I looked over at
Momma, she seemed to threaten, “Move and I'll tear you up,”
so, obedient to the unvoiced command, IJ sat still. The church
ladies were warming up behind me with a few hallelujahs and
Praise the Lords and Amens, and the preacher hadn’t really
moved into the meat of the sermon.

It was going to be a hot service.

On my way into church, I saw Sister Monroe, her open-
faced gold crown glinting when she opened her mouth to
return a neighborly greeting. She lived in the country and
couldn’t get to church every Sunday, so she made up for her
absences by shouting so hard when she did make it that she
shook the whole church. As soon as she took her seat, all the
ushers would move to her side of the church because it took
three women and sometimes a man or two to hold her.

Once when she hadn’t been to church for a few months
(she had taken off to have a child), she got the spirit and
started shouting, throwing her arms around and jerking her

- body, so that the ushers went over to hold her down, but she

tore herself away from them and ran up to the pulpit. She
stood in front of the altar, shaking like a freshly caught trout.
She screamed at Reverend Taylor. “Preach it. I say, preach it.”
Naturally he kept on preaching as if she wasn’t standing there
telling him what to do. Then she screamed an extremely fierce
“T said, preach it” and stepped up on the altar. The Reverend
kept on throwing out phrases like home-run balls and Sister
Monroe made a quick break and grasped for him. For just a

second, everything and everyone in the church except Rev-
erend Taylor and Sister Monroe hung loose like stockings on
a wash-line. Then she caught the minister by the sleeve of his
jacket and his coattail, then she rocked him from side to side.
I have to say this for our minister, he never stopped giving
us the lesson. The usher board made its way to the pulpit,
going up both aisles with a little more haste than is custom-
arily seen in church. Truth to tell, they fairly ran to the min-
ister’s aid. Then two of the deacons, in their shiny Sunday
suits, joined the ladies in white on the pulpit, and each time
they pried Sister Monroe loose from the preacher he took
another deep breath and kept on preaching, and Sister
Monroe grabbed him in another place, and more firmly. Rev-
erend Taylor was helping his rescuers as much as possible by
jumping around when he got a chance. His voice at one point
got so low it sounded like a roll of thunder, then Sister
Monroe’s “Preach it” cut through the roar, and we all won-
dered (I did, in any case) if it would ever end. Would they go
on forever, or get tired out at last like a game of blindman’s
bluff that lasted too long, with nobody caring who was “it”?
Pll never know what might have happened, because magi-
cally the pandemonium spread. The spirit infused Deacon
Jackson and Sister Willson, the chairman of the usher board,
at the same time. Deacon Jackson, a tall, thin, quiet man, who
was also a part-time Sunday school teacher, gave a scream like
a falling tree, leaned back on thin air and punched Reverend
Taylor on the arm. It must have hurt as much as it caught the
Reverend unawares. There was a moment’s break in the
rolling sounds and Reverend Taylor jerked around surprised,
and hauled off and punched Deacon Jackson. In the same
second Sister Willson caught his tie, looped it over her fist a

few times, and pressed down on him. There wasn’t time to




laugh or cry before all three of them were down on the floor
behind the altar. Their legs spiked out like kindling wood,

Sister Monroe, who had been the cause of all the excite-
ment, walked off the dais, cool and spent, and raised her flinty
voice in the hymn, “I came to Jesus, as I was, worried, wound
and sad, I found in Him a resting place and He has made me
glad.”

The minister took advantage of already being on the floor
and asked in a choky little voice if the church would kneel
with him to offer a prayer of thanksgiving. He said we had
been visited with a mighty spirit, and let the whole church
say Amen.

On the next Sunday, he took his text from the eighteenth
chapter of the Gospel according to St. Luke, and talked qui-
etly but seriously about the Pharisees, who prayed in the
streets so that the public would be impressed with their reli-
gious devotion. I doubt that anyone got the message—
certainly not those to whom it was directed. The deacon
board, however, did appropriate funds for him to buy a new
suit. The other was a total loss.

Our presiding elder had heard the story of Reverend
Taylor and Sister Monroe, but I was sure he didn’t know her
by sight. So my interest in the service’s potential and my aver-

: sion to Reverend Thomas caused me to turn him off. Turning

off or tuning out people was my highly developed art. The
custom of letting obedient children be seen but not heard was
so agreeable to me that I went one step further: Obedient chil-
dren should not see or hear if they chose not to do so. J laid a
handful of attention on my face and tuned up the sounds in
the church.

Sister Monroe’s fuse was already lit, and she sizzled some-
where to the right behind me. Elder Thomas jumped into the

sermon, determined, I suppose, to give the members what
they came for. I saw the ushers from the left side of the church
near the big windows begin to move discreetly, like pall-
bearers, toward Sister Monroe’s bench, Bailey jogged my
knee. When the incident with Sister Monroe, which we
always called simply “the incident,” had taken place, we had
been too astounded to laugh. But for weeks after, all we
needed to send us into violent outbursts of laughter was a
whispered “Preach it.” Anyway, he pushed my knee, covered
his mouth and whispered, “I say, preach it.”

I looked toward Momma, across that square of stained
boards, over the collection table, hoping that a look from her
would root me safely to my sanity. But for the first time in
memory Momma was staring behind me at Sister Monroe. I
supposed that she was counting on bringing that emotional
lady up short with a severe look or two. But Sister Monroe’s
voice had already reached the danger point. “Preach it!”

There were a few smothered giggles from the children’s
section, and Bailey nudged me again. “I say, preach it”—in a
whisper. Sister Monroe echoed him loudly, “I say, preach it!”

Two deacons wedged themselves around Brother Jackson
as a preventive measure and two large determined-looking
men walked down the aisle toward Sister Monroe.

While the sounds in the church were increasing, Elder
Thomas made the regrettable mistake of increasing his
volume too. Then suddenly, like a summer rain, Sister
Monroe broke through the cloud of people trying to hem her
in, and flooded up to the pulpit. She didn’t stop this time but
continued immediately to the altar, bound for Elder Thomas,
crying “] say, preach it.”

Bailey said out loud, “Hot dog” and “Damn” and “She’s
going to beat his butt.”




But Reverend Thomas didn’t intend to wait for that even-
tuality, so as Sister Monroe approached the pulpit from the
right he started descending from the left. He was not intimi-
dated by his change of venue. He continued preaching and
moving. He finally stopped right in front of the collection
table, which put him almost in our laps, and Sister Monroe
rounded the altar on his heels, followed by the deacons,
ushers, some unofficial members and a few of the bigger
children.

Just as the elder opened his mouth, pink tongue waving,
and said, “Great God of Mount Nebo,” Sister Monroe hit him
on the back of his head with her purse. Twice. Before he could
bring his lips together, his teeth fell, no, actually his teeth
jumped, out of his mouth.

The grinning uppers and lowers lay by my right shoe,
looking empty and at the same time appearing to contain all
the emptiness in the world. I could have stretched out a foot
and kicked them under the bench or behind the collection
table.

Sister Monroe was struggling with his coat, and the men
had all but picked her up to remove her from the building.
Bailey pinched me and said without moving his lips, “I'd like

_to see him eat dinner now.”

I looked at Reverend Thomas desperately. If he appeared
just a little sad or embarrassed, I could feel sorry for him and
wouldn't be able to laugh. My sympathy for him would keep
me from laughing. I dreaded laughing in church. If I lost con-
trol, two things were certain to happen. I would surely pee,
and just as surely get a whipping. And this time I would
probably die because everything was funny—Sister Monroe,
and Momma trying to keep her quiet with those threatening

looks, and Bailey whispering “Preach it” and Elder Thomas
with his lips Happing loose like tired elastic.

But Reverend Thomas shrugged off Sister Monroe’s
weakening clutch, pulled out an extra-large white hand-
kerchief and spread it over his nasty little teeth. Putting them
in his pocket, he gummed, “Naked I came into the world, and
naked I shall go out.”

Bailey’s laugh had worked its way up through his body
and was escaping through his nose in short hoarse snorts. I
didn’t try any longer to hold back the laugh, I just opened my
mouth and released sound. I heard the first titter jump up in
the air over my head, over the pulpit and out the window.
Momma said out loud, “Sister!” but the bench was greasy and
I slid off onto the floor. There was more laughter in me trying
to get out. I didn’t know there was that much in the whole
world. It pressed at all my body openings, forcing everything
in its path. I cried and hollered, passed gas and urine. I didn’t
see Bailey descend to the floor, but I rolled over once and he
was kicking and screaming too. Each time we looked at each
other we howled louder than before, and though he tried to
say something, the laughter attacked him and he was only able
to get out “I say, preach.” And then I rolled over onto Uncle
Willie’s rubber-tipped cane. My eyes followed the cane up to
his good brown hand on the curve and up the long, long white
sleeve to his face. The one side pulled down as it usually did
when he cried (it also pulled down when he laughed). He stut-
tered, “I’m gonna whip you this time myself.”

I have no memory of how we got out of church and into
the parsonage next door, but in that overstuffed parlor, Bailey
and I received the whipping of our lives. Uncle Willie ordered
us between licks to stop crying. I tried to, but Bailey refused to
cooperate. Later he explained that when a person is beating




you you should scream as loud as possible; maybe the whipper
will become embarrassed or else some sympathetic soul might
come to your rescue. Our savior came for neither of these rea-
sons, but because Bailey yelled so loud and disturbed what was
left of the service, the minister’s wife came out and asked
Uncle Willie to quiet us down.

Laughter so easily turns to hysteria for imaginative chil-
dren. I felt for weeks after that I had been very, very sick, and
until I completely recovered my strength I stood on laughter’s
cliff and any funny thing could hurl me off to my death far
below.

Each time Bailey said “Preach it” to me, I hit him as hard
as I could and cried.

