CHAPTER 21

Sey



BAILEY stuck branches in the ground behind the house and
covered them with a worn-through blanket, making a tent. It
was to be his Captain Marvel hideaway. There he initiated
girls into the mysteries of sex. One by one, he took the
impressed, the curious, the adventurous into the gray shadows,
after explaining that they were going to play Momma and
Poppa. I was assigned the role of Baby and lookout. The girls
were commanded to pull up their dresses and then he lay on
top and wiggled his hips.

I sometimes had to lift the flap (our signal that an adult
was approaching) and so I saw their pathetic struggles even as
they talked about school and the movies.

He had been playing the game for about six months before
he met Joyce. She was a country girl about four years older
than Bailey (he wasn’t quite eleven when they met) whose
parents had died and she along with her brothers and sisters
had been parceled out to relatives. Joyce had come to Stamps
to live with a widowed aunt who was even poorer than the

poorest person in town. Joyce was quite advanced physically

for her age. Her breasts were not the hard little knots of other
girls her age; they filled out the tops of her skimpy little
dresses. She walked stiffly, as if she were carrying a load
of wood between her legs. I thought of her as being coarse,
but Bailey said she was cute and that he wanted to play house
with her.

In the special way of women, Joyce knew she had made a
conquest, and managed to hang around the Store in the late
afternoons and all day Saturdays. She ran errands for Momma
when we were busy in the Store and sweated profusely. Often
when she came in after running down the hill, her cotton
dress would cling to her thin body and Bailey would glue his
eyes on her until her clothes dried.

Momma gave her small gifts of food to take to her aunt,
and on Saturdays Uncle Willie would sometimes give her a
dime for “show fare.”

During Passover week we weren’t allowed to go to the
movies (Momma said we all must sacrifice to purify our souls),
and Bailey and Joyce decided that the three of us would play
house. As usual, I was to be Baby.

He strung the tent and Joyce crawled in first. Bailey told
me to sit outside and play with my doll baby, and he went in
and the flap closed.

“Well, ain’t you going to open your trousers?” Joyce’s
voice was muffled.

“No. You just pull up your dress.”

There were rustling sounds from the tent and the sides
pooched out as if they were trying to stand up.

Bailey asked, “What are you doing?”

“Pulling off my drawers.”

“What for?”

“We can’t do it with my drawers on.”




“Why not?”

“Tiow are you going to get to it?”

Silence. My poor brother didn’t know what she meant. I
knew. I lifted the flap and said, “Joyce, don’t you do that to my
brother.” She nearly screamed, but she kept her voice low,
“Margaret, you close that door.” Bailey added, “Yes. Close it.
You're supposed to be playing with our doll baby.” I thought
he would go to the hospital if he let her do that to him, so I
warned him, “Bailey, if you let her do that to you, you'll be
sorry.” But he threatened that if I didn’t close the door he
wouldn't speak to me for a month, so I let the end of the
blanket fall and sat down on the grass in front of the tent.

Joyce poked her head out and said in a sugary, white-
woman-in-the-movies voice, “Baby, you go get some wood.
Daddy and I going to light a fire, then I’m going to make you
some cake.” Then her voice changed as if she was going to hit
me. “Go. Git.”

Bailey told me after that Joyce had hairs on her thing and
that she had gotten them from “doing it” with so many boys.
She even had hair under her arms. Both of them. He was very
proud of her accomplishments.

As their love affair progressed, his stealing from the Store
increased. We had always taken candy and a few nickels and
of course the sour pickles, but Bailey, now called upon to feed
Joyce’s ravening hunger, took cans of sardines and greasy
Polish sausage and cheese and even the expensive cans of pink
salmon that our family could seldom afford to eat.

Joyce’s willingness to do odd jobs slackened about this
time. She complained that she wasn’t feeling all that well. But
since she now had a few coins, she still hung around the Store
eating Planter’s peanuts and drinking Dr. Pepper.

Momma ran her off a few times. “Ain’t you said you

wasn't feeling well, Joyce? Hadn’t you better get home and let
your aunty do something for you?”

“Yes, ma’am.” Then reluctantly she was off the porch, her
stiff-legged walk carrying her up the hill and out of sight.

I think she was Bailey’s first love outside the family. For
him, she was the mother who let him get as close as he
dreamed, the sister who wasn’t moody and withdrawing, and
teary and tender-hearted. All he had to do was keep the food
coming in and she kept the affection flowing. It made no dif-
ference to him that she was almost a woman, or possibly it was
just that difference which made her so appealing

She was around for a few months, and as she had
appeared, out of limbo, so she disappeared into nothingness.
There was no gossip about her, no clues to her leaving or her
whereabouts. I noticed the change in Bailey before I discov-
ered that she was gone. He lost his interest in everything. He
mulled around and it would be safe to say “he paled.”
Momma noticed and said that he was feeling poorly because
of the change in seasons (we were nearing fall), so she went to
the woods for certain leaves, made him a tea and forced him to
drink it after a heaping spoonful of sulfur and molasses. The
fact that he didn’t fight it, didn’t try to talk his way out of
taking the medicine, showed without a glimmer of doubt he
was very sick.

If I had disliked Joyce while she had Bailey in her grasp, I
hated her for leaving. I missed the tolerance she had brought
to him (he had nearly given up sarcasm and playing jokes on
the country people) and he had taken to telling me his secrets
again. But now that she was gone he rivaled me in being
uncommunicative. He closed in upon himself hike a pond

swallowing a stone. There was no evidence that he had ever






opened up, and when I mentioned her he responded with
“Joyce who?”

Months later, when Momma was waiting on Joyce’s aunt,
she said, “Yes ma’am, Mrs. Goodman, life’s just one thing
right after the other.”

Mrs. Goodman was leaning on the red Coca-Cola box.
“That’s the blessed truth, Sister Henderson.” She sipped the
expensive drink.

“Things change so fast, it make your head swim.”

That was Momma’s way of opening up a conversation. I
stayed mouse-quiet so that I’d be able to hear the gossip and
take it to Bailey.

“Now, you take little Joyce. She used to be around the
Store all the time. Then she went up just like smoke. We ain’t
seed hide nor hair of her in months.”

“No’m. I shamed to tell you ... what took her off.” She
settled in on a kitchen chair. Momma spied me in the
shadows. “Sister, the Lord don’t like little jugs with big ears.
You ain’t got something to do, I'll find something for you.”

The truth had to float to me through the kitchen door.

“T ain’t got much, Sister Henderson, but I give that child
all I had.”

Momma said she bound that was true. She wouldn’t say
“bet.”

“And after all I did, she run off with one of those railroad
porters. She was loose just like her mammy before her. You
know how they say ‘blood will tell’?”

Momma asked, “How did the snake catch her?”

“Well, now, understand me, Sister Henderson, I don’t
hold this against you, I knows you a God-fearing woman. But
it seems like she met him here.”

Momma was flustered. Such goings on at the Store? She
asked, “At the Store?”

“Yes, ma’am. Member when that bunch of Elks come
over for their baseball game?” (Momma must have remem-
bered. | did.) “Well, as it turned out, he was one of them. She
left me a teenincy note. Said people in Stamps thought they
were better than she was, and that she hadn’t only made one
friend, and that was your grandson. Said she was moving to
Dallas, Texas, and gone marry that railroad porter.”

Momma said, “Do, Lord.”

Mrs. Goodman said, “You know, Sister Henderson, she
wasn’t with me long enough for me to get the real habit of her,
but still I miss her. She was sweet when she wanted to be.”
Momma consoled her with, “Well, we got to keep our mind
on the works of the Book. It say, ‘The Lord giveth and the
Lord taketh away.’ ”

Mrs. Goodman chimed in and they finished the phrase
together, “Blessed be the name of the Lord.”

I don’t know how long Bailey had known about Joyce, but
later in the evening when I tried to bring her name into con-
versation, he said, “Joyce? She’s got somebody to do it to her
all the time now.” And that was the last time her name was
mentioned.



