BANTAM BOOKS BY MAYA ANGELOU
ASK YOUR BOOKSELLER FOR THOSE
THAT YOU HAVE MISSED
GATHER TOGETHER IN MY NAME

SINGIN’ AND SWINGIN’ AND GETTIN’ MERRY
LIKE CHRISTMAS

THE HEART OF A WOMAN
MAYA ANGELOU: POEMS

WOULDN’T TAKE NOTHING FOR
MY JOURNEY NOW

ISHALL NOT BE MOVED

EVEN THE STARS LOOK LONESOME



Sa

THE CAGED
BIRD SINGS

Se







Maya Angelou

® é

BANTAM BOOKS
New York Toronto London

Sydney Auckland


This edition contains the complete text
of the original hardcover edition.
NOT ONE WORD HAS BERN OMITTED.
A Bantam Book / published by arrangement with
Random House, Inc.

PRINTING HISTORY
Random House edition published February 1970
Book-of-the-Month Club edition published March 1970
Ebony Book Club edition published April 1970
A portion of this book appeared in ssany magazine April 1970
Bantam mass market edition / March 1971
Bantam trade edition / June 1997

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The title, J Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, is from the poem “Sympathy,”
by Paul Laurence Dunbar.
“Lift Ev'ry Voice and Sing,” words by James Weldon Johnson, music by J. Rosamond
Johnson, Copyright Edward B. Marks Music Corporation.

All rights reserved.
Copyright © 1969 by Maya Angelou.
Cover photograph copyright © 1997 by Dwight Carter.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publisher.
For information address: Random House, Inc.,
201 East 50th Street, New York, N.Y. 10022.



If you purchased this book without a cover you should be aware that chis book is
stolen property. It was reported as “unsold and destroyed” to the publisher and nei-
ther the author nor the publisher has received any payment for this “stripped book.”





ISBN 0-553-38001-X
Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada

Bantam Books are published by Bantam Books, a division of Random House, Inc. Its trade-
mark, consisting of the words “Bantam Books” and the portrayal of a rooster, is Registered in
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office and in other countries. Marca Registrada. Bantam Books,
1540 Broadway, New York, New York 10036.

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

5798864

This book is dedicated to

MY SON, GUY JOHNSON,
and all the strong

black birds of promise

who defy the odds and gods

and sing their songs
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank my mother, Vivian Baxter, and my brother, Bailey
Johnson, who encouraged me to remember. Thanks to the
Harlem Writers’ Guild for concern and to John O. Killens
who told me I could write. To Nana Kobina Nketsia IV who
insisted that I must. Lasting gratitude to Gerard Purcell who
believed concretely and to Tony D’Amato who understood.
Thanks to Abbey Lincoln Roach for naming my book. A final
thanks to my editor at Random House, Robert Loomis, who
gently prodded me back into the lost years,


ae

“What you looking at me for?
I didn’t come to stay...”

1 HADN’T so much forgot as I couldn’t bring myself to
remember. Other things were more important.

“What you looking at me for?
I didn’t come to stay...”

Whether I could remember the rest of the poem or not was
immaterial. The truth of the statement was like a wadded-up
handkerchief, sopping wet in my fists, and the sooner they
accepted it the quicker I could let my hands open and the air
would cool my palms.
“What you looking at me for... ?”

The children’s section of the Colored Methodist Episcopal


Church was wiggling and giggling over my well-known
forgetfulness.

The dress I wore was lavender taffeta, and each time I
breathed it rustled, and now that I was sucking in air to
breathe out shame it sounded like crepe paper on the back of
hearses.

As Pd watched Momma put ruffles on the hem and cute
little tucks around the waist, I knew that once I put it on I’d
look like a movie star. (It was silk and that made up for the
awful color.) I was going to look like one of the sweet little
white girls who were everybody’s dream of what was right
with the world. Hanging softly over the black Singer sewing
machine, it looked like magic, and when people saw me
wearing it they were going to run up to me and say, “Mar-
guerite [sometimes it was ‘dear Marguerite’, forgive us,
please, we didn’t know who you were,” and I would answer
generously, “No, you couldn’t have known. Of course I for-
give you.”

Just thinking about it made me go around with angel’s
dust sprinkled over my face for days. But Easter’s early
morning sun had shown the dress to be a plain ugly cut-down
from a white woman’s once-was-purple throwaway. It was
old-lady-long too, but it didn’t hide my skinny legs, which
had been greased with Blue Seal Vaseline and powdered with
the Arkansas red clay. The age-faded color made my skin
look dirty like mud, and everyone in church was looking at
my skinny legs.

Wouldn’t they be surprised when one day I woke out of
my black ugly dream, and my real hair, which was long and
blond, would take the place of the kinky mass that Momma
wouldn't let me straighten? My light-blue eyes were going to
hypnotize them, after all the things they said about “my daddy


must of been a Chinaman” (I thought they meant made out of
china, like a cup) because my eyes were so small and squinty.
Then they would understand why I had never picked up a
Southern accent, or spoke the common slang, and why I had
to be forced to eat pigs’ tails and snouts. Because I was really
white and because a cruel fairy stepmother, who was under-
standably jealous of my beauty, had turned me into a too-big
Negro girl, with nappy black hair, broad feet and a space
between her teeth that would hold a number-two pencil.
“What you looking ...” The minister’s wife leaned
toward me, her long yellow face full of sorry. She whispered,
“I just come to tell you, it’s Easter Day.” I repeated, jamming
the words together, “Ijustcometotellyouit’sEasterDay,” as low
as possible. The giggles hung in the air like melting clouds
that were waiting to rain on me. I held up two fingers, close to
my chest, which meant that I had to go to the toilet, and tip-
toed toward the rear of the church. Dimly, somewhere over
my head, I heard ladies saying, “I.ord bless the child,” and
“Praise God.” My head was up and my eyes were open, but I
didn’t see anything. Halfway down the aisle, the church
exploded with “Were you there when they crucified my
Lord?” and I tripped over a foot stuck out from the children’s
pew. I stumbled and started to say something, or maybe to

“scream, but a green persimmon, or it could have been a lemon,

caught me between the legs and squeezed. I tasted the sour on
my tongue and felt it in the back of my mouth. Then before I
reached the door, the sting was burning down my legs and
into my Sunday socks. I tried to hold, to squeeze it back, to
keep it from speeding, but when I reached the church porch I
knew I’d have to let it go, or it would probably run right back
up to my head and my poor head would burst like a dropped
watermelon, and all the brains and spit and tongue and eyes


would roll all over the place. So I ran down into the yard and
let it go. I ran, peeing and crying, not toward the toilet out
back but to our house. I’d get a whipping for it, to be sure, and
the nasty children would have something new to tease me
about. I laughed anyway, partially for the sweet release; still,
the greater joy came not only from being liberated from the
silly church but from the knowledge that I wouldn’t die from
a busted head.

If growing up is painful for the Southern Black girl, being
aware of her displacement is the rust on the razor that
threatens the throat.

It is an unnecessary insult.

