CHAPTER 12



ON a late spring Saturday, after our chores (nothing like those
in Stamps) were done, Bailey and I were going out, he to play
baseball and I to the library. Mr. Freeman said to me, after
Bailey had gone downstairs, “Ritie, go get some milk for the
house.”

Mother usually brought milk when she came in, but that
morning as Bailey and I straightened the living room her bed-
room door had been open, and we knew that she hadn’t come
home the night before.

He gave me the money and I rushed to the store and back
to the house. After putting the milk in the icebox, I turned
and had just reached the front door when I heard, “Ritie.” He
was sitting in the big chair by the radio. “Ritie, come here.” J
didn’t think about the holding time until I got close to him.
His pants were open and his “thing” was standing out of his
britches by itself.

“No, sir, Mr. Freeman.” I started to back away. I didn’t
want to touch that mushy-hard thing again, and I didn’t need
him to hold me any more. He grabbed my arm and pulled me

between his legs. His face was still and looked kind, but he
didn’t smile or blink his eyes. Nothing. He did nothing,
except reach his left hand around to turn on the radio without
even looking at it. Over the noise of music and static, he said,
“Now, this ain’t gonna hurt you much. You liked it before,
didn’t you?”

I didn’t want to admit that I had in fact liked his holding
me or that I had liked his smell or the hard heart-beating, so I
said nothing. And his face became like the face of one of those
mean natives the Phantom was always having to beat up.

His legs were squeezing my waist. “Pull down your
drawers.” I hesitated for two reasons: he was holding me too
tight to move, and I was sure that any minute my mother
or Bailey or the Green Hornet would bust in the door and
save me.

“We was just playing before.” He released me enough to
snatch down my bloomers, and then he dragged me closer to
him. Turning the radio up loud, too loud, he said, “If you
scream, I’m gonna kill you. And if you tell, Pm gonna kill
Bailey.” I could tell he meant what he said. I couldn’t under-
stand why he wanted to kill my brother.-Neither of us had
done anything to him. And then.

Then there was the pain. A breaking and entering when
even the senses are torn apart. The act of rape on an eight-
year-old body is a matter of the needle giving because the
camel can’t. The child gives, because the body can, and the
mind of the violator cannot.

[thought I had died—I woke up in a white-walled world,
and it had to be heaven. But Mr. Freeman was there and he
was washing me. His hands shook, but he held me upright in
the tub and washed my legs. “I didn’t mean to hurt you, Ritie.




I didn’t mean it. But don’t you tell ... Remember, don’t you
tell a soul.”

I felt cool and very clean and just a little tired. “No, sir,
Mr. Freeman, I won’t tell.” I was somewhere above every-
thing. “It’s just that I’m so tired I'll just go and lay down a
while, please,” I whispered to him. I thought if I spoke out
loud, he might become frightened and hurt me again. He
dried me and handed me my bloomers. “Put these on and go
to the library. Your momma ought to be coming home soon.
You just act natural.”

Walking down the street, I felt the wet on my pants, and
my hips seemed to be coming out of their sockets. I couldn’t sit
long on the hard seats in the library (they had been con-
structed for children), so I walked by the empty lot where
Bailey was playing ball, but he wasn’t there. I stood for a while
and watched the big boys tear around the dusty diamond and
then headed home.

After two blocks, I knew I'd never make it. Not unless I
counted every step and stepped on every crack. I had started to
burn between my legs more than the time I’d wasted Sloan’s
Liniment on myself. My legs throbbed, or rather the insides of
my thighs throbbed, with the same force that Mr. Freeman’s
heart had beaten. Thrum ... step... thrum ... step... sTEP
ON THE CRACK ...thrum ... step. | went up the stairs one at a,
one at a, one at a time. No one was in the living room, so I
went straight to bed, after hiding my red-and-yellow-stained
drawers under the mattress.

When Mother came in she said, “Well, young lady, I
believe this is the first time I’ve seen you go to bed without
being told. You must be sick.”

I wasn’t sick, but the pit of my stomach was on fire—how
could I tell her that? Bailey came in later and asked me what

the matter was. There was nothing to tell him. When Mother
called us to eat and I said I wasn’t hungry, she laid her cool
hand on my forehead and cheeks. “Maybe it’s the measles.
They say they’re going around the neighborhood.” After she
took my temperature she said, “You have a little fever. You’ve
probably just caught them.”

Mr. Freeman took up the whole doorway, “Then Bailey
ought not to be in there with her. Unless you want a house full
of sick children.” She answered over her shoulder, “He may as
well have them now as later. Get them over with.” She
brushed by Mr. Freeman as if he were made of cotton. “Come
on, Junior. Get some cool towels and wipe your sister’s face.”

As Bailey left the room, Mr. Freeman advanced to the
bed. He leaned over, his whole face a threat that could have
smothered me. “If you tell ...” And again so softly, I almost
didn’t hear it—“Tf you tell.” I couldn’t summon up the energy
to answer him. He had to know that I wasn’t going to tell any-
thing. Bailey came in with the towels and Mr. Freeman
walked out.

Later Mother made a broth and sat on the edge of the bed
to feed me. The liquid went down my throat like bones. My
belly and behind were as heavy as cold iron, but it seemed my
head had gone away and pure air had replaced it on my shoul-
ders. Bailey read to me from The Rover Boys until he got
sleepy and went to bed.

That night I kept waking to hear Mother and Mr.
Freeman arguing. I couldn’t hear what they were saying, but I
did hope that she wouldn’t make him so mad that he’d hurt
her too. I knew he could do it, with his cold face and empty
eyes. Their voices came in faster and faster, the high sounds
on the heels of the lows. I would have liked to have gone in.
Just passed through as if I were going to the toilet. Just show




my face and they might stop, but my legs refused to move. I
could move the toes and ankles, but the knees had turned
to wood.

Maybe I slept, but soon morning was there and Mother
was pretty over my bed. “How’re you feeling, baby?”

“Fine, Mother.” An instinctive answer. “Where’s Bailey?”

She said he was still asleep but that she hadn’t slept all
night. She had been in my room off and on to see about me. |
asked her where Mr. Freeman was, and her face chilled with
remembered anger. “He’s gone. Moved this morning. I’m
going to take your temperature after I put on your Cream of
Wheat.”

Could I tell her now? The terrible pain assured me that I
couldn’t. What he did to me, and what I allowed, must have
been very bad if already God let me hurt so much. If Mr.
Freeman was gone, did that mean Bailey was out of danger?
And if so, if I told him, would he still love me?

After Mother took my temperature, she said she was
going to bed for a while but to wake her if I felt sicker. She
told Bailey to watch my face and arms for spots and when they
came up he could paint them with calamine lotion.

That Sunday goes and comes in my memory like a bad
connection on an overseas telephone call. Once, Bailey was
reading The Katzenjammer Kids to me, and then without a
pause for sleeping, Mother was looking closely at my face, and
soup trickled down my chin and some got into my mouth and
I choked. Then there was a doctor who took my temperature
and held my wrist.

“Bailey!” I supposed I had screamed, for he materialized
suddenly, and I asked him to help me and we'd run away to
California or France or Chicago. I knew that I was dying and,
in fact, I longed for death, but I didn’t want to die anywhere

near Mr. Freeman. I knew that even now he wouldn’t have
allowed death to have me unless he wished it to.

Mother said I should be bathed and the linens had to be
changed since I had sweat so much. But when they tried to
move me [| fought, and even Bailey couldn’t hold me. Then
she picked me up in her arms and the terror abated for a
while. Bailey began to change the bed. As he pulled off the
soiled sheets he dislodged the panties | had put under the mat-
tress. They fell at Mother’s feet.







