CHAPTER 26

Ey



THE intensity with which young people live demands that
they “blank out” as often as possible. 1 didn’t actually think
about facing Mother until the last day of our journey. I was
“going to California.” To oranges and sunshine and movie
stars and earthquakes and (finally I realized) to Mother. My
old guilt came back to me like a much-missed friend. I won-
dered if Mr. Freeman’s name would be mentioned, or if I
would be expected to say something about the situation
myself. I certainly couldn’t ask Momma, and Bailey was a zil-
lion miles away.

The agony of wonder made the fuzzy seats hard, soured
the boiled eggs, and when I looked at Momma she seemed too
big and too black and very old-fashioned. Everything I saw
shuttered against me. The little towns, where nobody waved,
and the other passengers in the train, with whom I had
achieved an almost kinfolk relationship, disappeared into a
common strangeness.

I was as unprepared to meet my mother as a sinner is
reluctant to meet his Maker. And all too soon she stood before

me, smaller than memory would have her but more glorious
than any recall. She wore a light-tan suede suit, shoes to match
and a mannish hat with a feather in the band, and she patted
my face with gloved hands. Except for the lipsticked mouth,
white teeth and shining black eyes, she might have just
emerged from a dip in a beige bath. My picture of Mother and
Momma embracing on the train platform has been darkly
retained through the coating of the then embarrassment and
the now maturity. Mother was a blithe chick nuzzling around
the large, solid dark hen. The sounds they made had a rich
inner harmony. Momma’s deep, slow voice lay under my
mother’s rapid peeps and chirps like stones under rushing
water,

The younger woman kissed and laughed and rushed
about collecting our coats and getting our luggage carted off.
She easily took care of the details that would have demanded
half of a country person’s day. I was struck again by the
wonder of her, and for the length of my trance, the greedy
uneasiness were held at bay.

We moved into an apartment, and I slept on a sofa that
miraculously transformed itself at night into a large comfort-
able bed. Mother stayed in Los Angeles long enough to get us
settled, then she returned to San Francisco to arrange living
accommodations for her abruptly enlarged family.

Momma and Bailey (he joined us a month after our
arrival) and I lived in Los Angeles about six months while our
permanent living arrangements were being concluded. Daddy
Bailey visited occasionally, bringing shopping bags of fruit.
He shone like a Sun God, benignly warming and brightening
his dark subjects.

Since I was enchanted with the creation of my own world,
years had to pass before I reflected on Momma’s remarkable








adjustment to that foreign life. An old Southern Negro
woman who had lived her life under the left breast of her
community learned to deal with white landlords, Mexican
neighbors and Negro strangers. She shopped in supermarkets
larger than the town she came from. She dealt with accents
that must have struck jarringly on her ears. She, who had
never been more than fifty miles from her birthplace, learned
to traverse the maze of Spanish-named streets in that enigma
that is Los Angeles.

She made the same kinds of friends she had always had.
On late Sunday afternoons before evening church services, old
women who were carbon copies of herself came to the apart-
ment to share leftovers from the Sunday meal and religious
talk of a Bright Hereafter.

When the arrangements for our move north were com-
pleted, she broke the shattering news that she was going back
to Arkansas. She had done her job. She was needed by Uncle
Willie. We had our own parents at last. At least we were in
the same state.

There were foggy days of unknowing for Bailey and me.
It was all well and good to say we would be with our parents,
but after all, who were they? Would they be more severe with

cour didoes than she? That would be bad. Or more lax? Which

would be even worse. Would we learn to speak that fast lan-
guage? I doubted that, and I doubted even more that I would
ever find out what they laughed about so loudly and so often.

T would have been willing to return to Stamps even
without Bailey. But Momma left for Arkansas without me
and her solid air packed around her like cotton.

Mother drove us toward San Francisco over the big white
highway that would not have surprised me had it never

ended. She talked incessantly and pointed out places of
interest. As we passed Capistrano she sang a popular song that
I'd heard on the radio: “When the swallows come back to
Capistrano.”

She strung humorous stories along the road like a bright
wash and tried to captivate us. But her being, and her being
our mother, had done the job so successfully that it was a little
distracting to see her throwing good energy after good.

The big car was obedient under her one-hand driving,
and she pulled on her Lucky Strike so hard that her cheeks
were sucked in to make valleys in her face. Nothing could
have been more magical than to have found her at last, and
have her solely to ourselves in the closed world of a mov-
ing car.

Although we were both enraptured, neither Bailey nor I
was unaware of her nervousness. The knowledge that we had
the power to upset that goddess made us look at each other
conspiratorially and smile. It also made her human.

We spent a few dingy months in an Oakland apartment
which had a bathtub in the kitchen and was near enough to
the Southern Pacific Mole to shake at the arrival and depar-
ture of every train. In many ways it was St. Louis revisited —
along with Uncles Tommy and Billy—and Grandmother
Baxter of the pince-nez and strict carriage was again In Resi-
dence, though the mighty Baxter clan had fallen into hard
umes after the death of Grandfather Baxter some years
earlier.

We went to school and no family member questioned the
output or quality of our work. We went to a playground
which sported a basketball court, a football field and Ping
Pong tables under awnings. On Sundays instead of going to
church we went to the movies.








I slept with Grandmother Baxter, who was afflicted with
chronic bronchitis and smoked heavily. During the day she
stubbed out half-finished cigarettes and put them in an ash-
tray beside her bed. At night when she woke up coughing she
fumbled in the dark for a butt (she called them “Willies”) and
after a blaze of light she smoked the strengthened tobacco
until her irritated throat was deadened with nicotine. For the
first weeks of sleeping with her, the shaking bed and scent of
tobacco woke me, but I readily became used to it and slept
peacefully through the night.

One evening after going to bed normally, I awoke to
another kind of shaking. In the blunted light through the
window shade I saw my mother kneeling by my bed. She
brought her face close to my ear.

“Ritie,” she whispered, “Ritie. Come, but be very quiet.”
Then she quietly rose and left the room. Dutifully and in a
haze of ponderment I followed. Through the half-open
kitchen door the light showed Bailey’s pajamaed legs dan-
gling from the covered bathtub. The clock on the dining-
room table said 2:30. I had never been up at that hour.

I looked Bailey a question and he returned a sheepish
gaze. I knew immediately that there was nothing to fear.
Then I ran my mind through the catalogue of important
dates. It wasn’t anybody’s birthday, or April Fool’s Day, or
Halloween, but it was something.

Mother closed the kitchen door and told me to sit beside
Bailey. She put her hands on her hips and said we had been
invited to a party.

Was that enough to wake us in the middle of the night!
Neither of us said anything.

She continued, “I am giving a party and you are my hon-
ored and only guests.”

She opened the oven and took out a pan of her crispy
brown biscuits and showed us a pot of milk chocolate on the
back of the stove. There was nothing for it but to laugh at
our beautiful and wild mother. When Bailey and I started
laughing, she joined in, except that she kept her finger in front
of her mouth to try to quiet us.

We were served formally, and she apologized for having
no orchestra to play for us but said she’d sing as a substitute.
She sang and did the Time Step and the Snake Hips and the
Suzy Q. What child can resist a mother who laughs freely and
often, especially if the child’s wit is mature enough to catch the
sense of the joke?

MOTHER’S beauty made her powerful and her power made
her unflinchingly honest. When we asked her what she did,
what her job was, she walked us to Oakland’s Seventh Street,
where dusty bars and smoke shops sat in the laps of storefront
churches. She pointed out Raincoat’s Pinochle Parlor and
Slim Jenkins’ pretentious saloon. Some nights she played
pinochle for money or ran a poker game at Mother Smith’s or
stopped at Slim’s for a few drinks. She told us that she had
never cheated anybody and wasn’t making any preparations
to do so. Her work was as honest as the job held by fat Mrs.
Walker (a maid), who lived next door to us, and “a damn sight
better paid.” She wouldn’t bust suds for anybody nor be
anyone’s kitchen bitch. The good Lord gave her a mind and
she intended to use it to support her mother and her children.
She didn’t need to add “And have a little fun along the way.”

In the street people were genuinely happy to see her.
“Hey, baby. What’s the news?”

“Everything’s steady, baby, steady.”

“How you doing, pretty?”




“I can’t win, cause of the shape I’m in.” (Said with a laugh
that belied the content.)

“You all right, momma?”

“Aw, they tell me the whitefolks still in the lead.” (Said as
if that was not quite the whole truth.)

She supported us efficiently with humor and imagination.
Occasionally we were taken to Chinese restaurants or Italian
pizza parlors. We were introduced to Hungarian goulash and
Trish stew. Through food we learned that there were other
people in the world.

With all her jollity, Vivian Baxter had no mercy. There
was a saying in Oakland at the time which, if she didn’t say it
herself, explained her attitude. The saying was, “Sympathy is
next to shit in the dictionary, and | can’t even read.” Her
temper had not diminished with the passing of time, and
when a passionate nature is not eased with moments of com-
passion, melodrama is likely to take the stage. In each outburst
of anger my mother was fair. She had the impartiality of
nature, with the same lack of indulgence or clemency.

Before we arrived from Arkansas, an incident took place
that left the main actors in jail and in the hospital. Mother had
a business partner (who may have been a little more than that)
with whom she ran a restaurant cum gambling casino. The
partner was not shouldering his portion of the responsibility,
according to Mother, and when she confronted him he
became haughty and domineering, and he unforgivably called
her a bitch. Now, everyone knew that although she cursed as
freely as she laughed, no one cursed around her, and certainly
no one cursed her. Maybe for the sake of business arrange-
ments she restrained a spontaneous reaction. She told her
partner, “I’m going to be one bitch, and I’ve already been that

one.” In a foolhardy gesture the man relieved himself of still
another “bitch”——and Mother shot him. She had anticipated
some trouble when she determined to speak to him and so had
taken the precaution to slip a little 32 in her big skirt pocket.

Shot once, the partner stumbled toward her, instead of
away, and she said that since she had intended to shoot him
(notice: shoot, not kill) she had no reason to run away, so she
shot him a second time. It must have been a maddening situa-
tion for them. To her, each shot seemed to impel him forward,
the reverse of her desire; and for him, the closer he got to her,
the more she shot him. She stood her ground until he reached
her and flung both arms around her neck, dragging her to the
floor. She later said the police had to untwine him before he
could be taken to the ambulance. And on the following day,
when she was released on bail, she looked in a mirror and
“had black eyes dawn to here.” In throwing his arms around
her, he must have struck her. She bruised easily.

The partner lived, though shot twice, and although the
partnership was dissolved they retained admiration for each
other. He had been shot, true, but in her fairness she had
warned him. And he had had the strength to give her two
black eyes and then live. Admirable qualities.

World War II started on a Sunday afternoon when I was
on my way to the movies. People in the streets shouted,
“We're at war. We've declared war on Japan.”

I ran all the way home. Not too sure I wouldn’t be
bombed before I reached Bailey and Mother. Grandmother
Baxter calmed my anxiety by explaining that America would
not be bombed, not as long as Franklin Delano Roosevelt was
President. He was, after all, a politician’s politician and he
knew what he was doing.




Soon after, Mother married Daddy Clidell, who turned
out to the be the first father I would know. He was a suc-
cessful businessman, and he and Mother moved us to San
Francisco. Uncle Tommy, Uncle Billy and Grandmother
Baxter remained in the big house in Oakland.

