CHAPTER 33

Se



THE house seemed smaller and quieter after the trip south,
and the first bloom of San Francisco’s glamour had dulled
around the edges. Adults had lost the wisdom from the sur-
face of their faces. I reasoned that I had given up some youth
for knowledge, but my gain was more valuable than the loss.
Bailey was much older too. Even years older than I had
become. He had made friends during that youth-shattering
summer with a group of slick street boys. His language had
changed. He was forever dropping slangy terms into his sen-
tences like dumplings in a pot. He may have been glad to see

.me, but he didn’t act much like it. When I tried to tell him of

my adventures and misadventures, he responded with a casual
indifference which stilled the tale on my lips. His new com-
panions cluttered the living room and halls wearing zoot suits
and wide-brimmed hats and dangling long snaky chains
hooked at their belts. They drank sloe gin secretly and told
dirty jokes. Although I had no regrets, I told myself sadly that
growing up was not the painless process one would have
thought it to be.

In one area my brother and I found ourselves closer. I had
gotten the knack of public dancing. All the lessons with
Mother, who danced so effortlessly, had not borne immediate
fruit. But with my newly and dearly bought assurance I could
give myself up to the rhythms and let them propel me where
they willed.

Mother allowed us to go to the big band dances in the
crowded city auditorium. We danced the jitterbug to Count
Basie, the Lindy and the Big Apple to Cab Calloway, and
the Half Time Texas Hop to Duke Ellington. In a matter of
months cute Bailey and his tall sister were famous as those
dancing fools (which was an apt description).

Although I had risked my life (not intentionally) in her
defense, Mother’s reputation, good name and community
image ceased, or nearly ceased, being of interest to me. It was
not that I cared for her less but that I concerned myself less
about everything and everyone. I often thought of the tedium

of life once one had seen all its surprises. In two months, I had
become blasé.

MOTHER and Bailey were entangled in the Oedipal skein.
Neither could do without or do with the other; yet the con-
strictions of conscience and society, morality and ethos dic-
tated a separation. On some flimsy excuse, Mother ordered
Bailey out of the house. On an equally flimsy excuse he com-
plied. Bailey was sixteen, small for his age, bright for any and
hopelessly in love with Mother Dear. Her heroes were her
friends and her friends were big men in the rackets. They
wore two-hundred-dollar Chesterfield coats, Busch shoes at
fifty dollars a pair and Knox hats. Their shirts were mono-
grammed and their fingernails manicured. How could a

sixteen-year-old boy hope to compete with such overshad-




owing rivals? He did what he had to do. He acquired a with-
ered white prostitute, a diamond ring on his little finger and a
Harris tweed coat with raglan sleeves. He didn’t consciously
consider the new possessions the open sesame to Mother
Dear’s vault of acceptance. And she had no idea that her pref-
erences prodded him to such excesses.

From the wings I heard and watched the pavane of
tragedy move steadily toward its climax. Interception and
even the thought of it was impossible. Easier to plan an
obstruction to a sunrise or a hurricane. If Mother was a beau-
tiful woman who exacted the tribute of obeisance from all
men, she was also a mother, and “a damn good one.” No son
of hers was going to be exploited by a used-up white whore,
who wanted to milk him of his youth and spoil him for adult-
hood. Hell, no.

Bailey, for his part, was her son and she was his mother.
He had no intention of taking low even from the most beau-
tiful woman in the world. The fact that she happened to be his
mother did nothing to weaken his resolve.

Get out? Oh, hell, yes. Tomorrow? What’s wrong with
today? Today? What about right now? But neither could
move until all the measured steps had been negotiated.

During the weeks of bitter wrangling I sat in hopeless

-wonder. We were not allowed profanity or even obvious sar-

casm, but Bailey looped his language around his tongue and
issued it out to Mother in alum drops. She threw her “ing
bings” (passionate explosions guaranteed to depilate the chest
of the strongest man) and was sweetly sorry (only to me) after.

I had been left out of their power/love struggles. It would
be more correct to say that since neither needed a claque I was
forgotten on the sidelines.

It was a little like Switzerland in World War II. Shells

were bursting all around me, souls were tortured and I was
powerless in the confines of imposed neutrality—hopes were
dying. The confrontation, which brought relief, had come on
an ordinary unheralded evening. It was after eleven o'clock, so
I left my door ajar, hoping to hear Mother go out, or the creak
of Bailey easing up the stairs.

The record player on the first floor volumed up Lonnie
Johnson singing, “Tomorrow night, will you remember what
you said tonight?” Glasses clinked and voices rubbed each
other. A party was shimmering below and Bailey had defied
Mother’s eleven o’clock curfew. If he made it in before mid-
night, she might be satisfied with slapping him across the face
a few times with her lashing words.

Twelve o’clock came and went at once, and I sat up in bed
and laid my cards out for the first of many games of solitaire.

“BAILEY!”

My watch hands made the uneven V of one o'clock.

“Yes, Mother Dear?” En garde. His voice thrust sweet and
sour, and he accented the “dear.”

“I guess you’re aman... Turn down that record player.”
She shouted the last to the revelers.

“I’m your son, Mother Dear.” A swift parry.

“Is it eleven o'clock, Bailey?” That was a feint, designed to
catch the opponent offguard.

“It’s after one o’clock, Mother Dear.” He had opened up
the game, and the strokes from then on would have to be
direct.

“Clidell is the only man in this house, and if you think
you're so much of aman...” Her voice popped like a razor on

a strap.

“I’m leaving now, Mother Dear.” The deferential tone






heightened the content of his announcement. In a bloodless
coup he had thrust beneath her visor.

Now, laid open, she had no recourse but to hurry along
the tunnel of her anger, headlong.

“Then Goddammit, get your heels to clicking.” And her
heels were clicking down the linoleum hall as Bailey tap-
danced up the stairs to his room.

When rain comes finally, washing away a low sky of
muddy ocher, we who could not control the phenomenon are
pressed into relief. The near-occult feeling: The fact of being
witness to the end of the world gives way to tangible things.
Even if the succeeding sensations are not common, they are at
least not mysterious.

Bailey was leaving home. At one o’clock in the morning,
my little brother, who in my lonely days of inferno dwelling
had protected me from goblins, gnomes, gremlins and the
devils, was leaving home.

I had known all along the inevitable outcome and that I
dared not poke into his knapsack of misery, even with the
offer to help him carry it.

I went to his room, against my judgment, and found him
throwing his carefully tended clothes into a pillowcase. His
maturity embarrassed me. In his little face, balled up like a
fist, I found no vestige of my brother, and when, not knowing
what to say, I asked if I could help, he answered, “Leave me
the shit alone.’

I leaned on the doorjamb, lending him my physical pres-
ence but said no more.

“She wants me out, does she? Well, I’ll get out of here so
fast I'll leave the air on fire. She calls herself a mother? Huh!
Pll be damned. She’s seen the last of me. I can make it. I'll
always make it.”

At some point he noticed me still in the doorway, and his
consciousness stretched to remember our relationship.

“Maya, if you want to leave now, come on. I'll take care of
you.”

He didn’t wait for an answer, but as quickly went back to
speaking to his soul. “She won’t miss me, and I sure as hell
won't miss her. To hell with her and everybody else.”

He had finished jamming his shoes on top of his shirts and
ties, and socks were wadded into the pillowcase. He remem-
bered me again.

“Maya, you can have my books.”

My tears were not for Bailey or Mother or even myself
but for the helplessness of mortals who live on the sufferance
of Life. In order to avoid this bitter end, we wouid ali have to
be born again, and born with the knowledge of alternatives.
Even then?

Bailey grabbed up the lumpy pillowcase and pushed by
me for the stairs. As the front door slammed, the record player
downstairs mastered the house and Nat King Cole warned
the world to “straighten up and fly right.” As if they could, as
if human beings could make a choice.

Mother’s eyes were red, and her face puffy, the next
morning, but she smiled her “everything is everything” smile
and turned in tight littl moons, making breakfast, talking
business and brightening the corner where she was. No one
mentioned Bailey’s absence as if things were as they should be
and always were.

The house was smudged with unspoken thoughts and it
was necessary to go to my room to breathe. I believed I knew
where he headed the night before, and made up my mind to
find him and offer him my support. In the afternoon I went to
a bay-windowed house which boasted rooms, in green and




orange letters, through the glass. A woman of any age past
thirty answered my ring and said Bailey Johnson was at the
top of the stairs.

His eyes were as red as Mother’s had been, but his face had
loosened a little from the tightness of the night before. In an
almost formal manner I was invited into a room with a clean
chenille-covered bed, an easy chair, a gas firepiace and a table.

He began to talk, covering up the unusual situation that
we found ourselves in.

“Nice room, isn’t it? You know it’s very hard to find
rooms now. The war and all... Betty lives here [she was the
white prostitute] and she got this place for me ... Maya, you
know, it’s better this way ... I mean, I’m a man, and I have to

7

be on my own...’

I was furious that he didn’t curse and abuse the Fates or
Mother or at least act put upon.

“Well’—I thought to start it—“If Mother was really a
mother, she wouldn’t have—”

He stopped me, his little black hand held up as if 1 were to
read his palm. “Wait, Maya, she was right. There is a tide and
time in every man’s life—~”

“Bailey, you're sixteen.”

“Chronologically, yes, but I haven’t been sixteen for years.
Anyway, there comes a time when a man must cut the apron
strings and face life on his own... As | was saying to Mother
Dear, I’ve come to—”

“When were you talking to Mother .. . ?”

“This morning, I said to Mother Dear—”

“Did you phone her?”

“Yes. And she came by here. We had a very fruitful dis-
cussion”——he chose his words with the precision of a Sunday
school teacher——“She understands completely. There is a time

in every man’s life when he must push off from the wharf of
safety into the sea of chance ... Anyway, she is arranging with
a friend of hers in Oakland to get me on the Southern Pacific.
Maya, it’s just a start. I’ll begin as a dining-car waiter and then
a steward, and when I know all there is to know about that,
Pll branch out ... The future looks good. The Black man
hasn’t even begun to storm the battlefronts. I’m going for
broke myself.”

His room smelled of cooked grease, Lysol and age, but his
face believed the freshness of his words, and I had no heart
nor art to drag him back to the reeking reality of our life and
umes.

Whores were lying down first and getting up last in the
room next door. Chicken suppers and gambling games were
rioting on a twenty-four-hour basis downstairs. Sailors and
soldiers on their doom-lined road to war cracked windows
and broke locks for blocks around, hoping to leave their
imprint on a building or in the memory of a victim. A chance
to be perpetrated. Bailey sat wrapped in his decision and anes-
thetized by youth. If I'd had any suggestion to make I couldn’t
have penetrated his unlucky armor. And, most regrettable, I
had no suggestion to make. ,

“I’m your sister, and whatever I can do, I’ll do it.”

“Maya, don’t worry about me. That’s all I want you to do.
Don’t worry. Pll be okey-dokey.”

I left his room because, and only because, we had said all
we could say. The unsaid words pushed roughly against the
thoughts that we had no craft to verbalize, and crowded the
room to uneasiness.





