CHAPTER 10

Se



GRANDMOTHER Baxter was a quadroon or an octoroon, or in
any case she was nearly white. She had been raised by a
German family in Cairo, Illinois, and had come to St. Louis at
the turn of the century to study nursing. While she was
working at Homer G. Phillips Hospital she met and married
Grandfather Baxter. She was white (having no features that
could even loosely be called Negroid) and he was Black.
While she spoke with a throaty German accent until her
death, he had the choppy spouting speech of the West Indians.

Their marriage was a happy one. Grandfather had a

famous saying that caused great pride in his family: “Bah

Jesus, I live for my wife, my children and my dog.” He took
extreme care to prove that statement true by taking the word
of his family even in the face of contradictory evidence.

The Negro section of St. Louis in the mid-thirties had all
the finesse of a gold-rush town. Prohibition, gambling and
their related vocations were so obviously practiced that it was
hard for me to believe that they were against the law. Bailey
and I, as newcomers, were quickly told by our schoolmates

who the men on the street corners were as we passed. I was
sure that they had taken their names from Wild West Books
(Hard-hitting Jimmy, Two Gun, Sweet Man, Poker Pete),
and to prove me right, they hung around in front of saloons
like unhorsed cowboys.

We met the numbers runners, gamblers, lottery takers
and whiskey salesmen not only in the loud streets but in our
orderly living room as well. They were often there when we
returned from school, sitting with hats in their hands, as we
had done upon our arrival in the big city. They waited silently
for Grandmother Baxter.

Her white skin and the pince-nez that she dramatically
took from her nose and let hang free on a chain pinned to her
dress were factors that brought her a great deal of respect.
Moreover, the reputation of her six mean children and the fact
that she was a precinct captain compounded her power and
gave her the leverage to deal with even the lowest crook
without fear. She had pull with the police department, so the
men in their flashy suits and fleshy scars sat with churchlike
decorum and waited to ask favors from her. If Grandmother
raised the heat off their gambling parlors, or said the word
that reduced the bail of a friend waiting in jail, they knew
what would be expected of them. Come election, they were to
bring in the votes from their neighborhood. She most often
got them leniency, and they always brought in the vote.

St. Louis also introduced me to thin-sliced ham (I thought
it a delicacy), jelly beans and peanuts mixed, lettuce on sand-
wich bread, Victrolas and family loyalty. In Arkansas, where
we cured our own meat, we ate half-inch slabs of ham for
breakfast, but in St. Louis we bought the paper-thin slices in a
strange-smelling German store and ate them in sandwiches. If
Grandmother never lost her German accent, she also never




lost her taste for the thick black German Brot, which we
bought unsliced. In Stamps, lettuce was used only to make a
bed for potato salad or slaw, and peanuts were brought in raw
from the field and roasted in the bottom of the oven on cold
nights. The rich scents used to fill the house and we were
always expected to eat too many. But that was a Stamps
custom. In St. Louis, peanuts were bought in paper bags and
mixed with jelly beans, which meant that we ate the salt and
sugar together and I found them a delicious treat. The best
thing the big town had to offer.

When we enrolled in Toussaint L’Ouverture Grammar
School, we were struck by the ignorance of our schoolmates
and the rudeness of our teachers. Only the vastness of the
building impressed us; not even the white school in Stamps
was as large.

The students, however, were shockingly backward. Bailey
and I did arithmetic at a mature level because of our work in
the Store, and we read well because in Stamps there wasn’t
anything else to do. We were moved up a grade because our
teachers thought that we country children would make our
classmates feel inferior—and we did. Bailey would not refrain
from remarking on our classmates’ lack of knowledge. At
lunchtime in the large gray concrete playground, he would

‘stand in the center of a crowd of big boys and ask, “Who was

Napoleon Bonaparte?” “How many feet make a mile?” It was
infighting, Bailey style.

Any of the boys might have been able to beat him with
their fists, but if they did, they’d just have had to do it again
the next day, and Bailey never held a brief for fighting fair. He
taught me that once I got into a fight I should “grab for the
balls right away.” He never answered when I asked, “Suppose
I'm fighting a girl?”

We went to school there a full year, but all ] remember
hearing that I hadn’t heard before was, “Making thousands of
egg-shaped oughts will improve penmanship.”

The teachers were more formal than those we knew in
Stamps, and although they didn’t whip their students with
switches, they gave them licks in the palms of their hands with
rulers. In Stamps teachers were much friendlier, but that was
because they were imported from the Arkansas Negro col-
leges, and since we had no hotels or rooming houses in town,
they had to live with private families. If a lady teacher took
company, or didn’t receive any mail or cried alone in her room
at night, by the weeks’ end even the children discussed her
morality, her loneliness and her other failings generally. It
would have been near impossible to maintain formality under
a small town’s invasions of privacy.

St. Louis teachers, on the other hand, tended to act
very siditty, and talked down to their students from the
lofty heights of education and whitefolks’ enunciation. They,
women as well as men, all sounded like my father with their
ers and errers. They walked with their knees together and
talked through tight lips as if they were as afraid to let the
sound out as they were to inhale the dirty air that the listener
gave off.

We walked to school around walls of bricks and breathed
the coal dust for one discouraging winter. We learned to say
“Yes” and “No” rather than “Yes, ma’am,” and “No, ma’am.”

Occasionally Mother, whom we seldom saw in the house,
had us meet her at Louie’s. It was a long dark tavern at the
end of the bridge near our school, and was owned by two
Syrian brothers.

We used to come in the back door, and the sawdust, stale
beer, steam and boiling meat made me feel as if I’d been




eating mothballs. Mother had cut my hair in a bob like hers
and straightened it, so my head felt skinned and the back of
my neck so bare that I was ashamed to have anyone walk up
behind me. Naturally, this kept me turning quickly as if I
expected something to happen.

At Louie’s we were greeted by Mother’s friends as
“Bibbie’s darling babies” and were given soft drinks and
boiled shrimp. While we sat on the stiff wooden booths,
Mother would dance alone in front of us to music from the
Seeburg. I loved her most at those times. She was like a pretty
kite that floated just above my head. If I liked, I could pull it
in to me by saying I had to go to the toilet or by starting a fight
with Bailey. I never did either, but the power made me tender
to her.

The Syrian brothers vied for her attention as she sang the
heavy blues that Bailey and I almost understood. They
watched her, even when directing their conversation to other
customers, and I knew they too were hypnotized by this beau-
tiful lady who talked with her whole body and snapped her
fingers louder than anyone in the whole world. We learned
the Time Step at Louie’s. It is from this basic step that most
American Black dances are born. It is a series of taps, jumps
and rests, and demands careful listening, feeling and coordi-
nation. We were brought before Mother’s friends, there in the
heavy saloon air, to show our artistry. Bailey learned easily,
and has always been the better dancer. But I learned too. I
approached the Time Step with the same determination to
win that I had approached the time tables with. There was no
Uncle Willie or sizzling pot-bellied stove, but there was
Mother and her laughing friends, and they amounted to the
same thing. We were applauded and given more soft drinks

and more shrimp, but it was to be years later before I found
the joy and freedom of dancing well.

Mother’s brothers, Uncles Tutti, Tom and Ira, were well-
known young men about St. Louis. They all had city jobs,
which I now understand to have been no mean feat for Negro
men. Their jobs and their family set them apart, but they were
best known for their unrelenting meanness. Grandfather had
told them, “Bah Jesus, if you ever get in jail for stealing or
some such foolishness, I’ll let you rot. But if you’re arrested for
fighting, Pll sell the house, lock, stock and barrel, to get you

pr

out!” With that kind of encouragement, backed by explosive
tempers, it was no wonder they became fearsome characters.
Our youngest uncle, Billy, was not old enough to join in their
didoes. One of their more flamboyant escapades has become a
proud family legend.

Pat Patterson, a big man, who was himself protected by
the shield of a bad reputation, made the mistake of cursing my
mother one night when she was out alone. She reported the
incident to her brothers. They ordered one of their hangers-on
to search the streets for Patterson, and when he was located, to
telephone them. -

As they waited throughout the afternoon, the living room
filled with smoke and the murmurs of plans. From time to
time, Grandfather came in from the kitchen and said, “Don’t
kill him. Mind you, just don’t kill him,” then went back to his
coffee with Grandmother.

They went to the saloon where Patterson sat drinking at a
small table. Uncle Tommy stood by the door, Uncle Tutti sta-
tioned himself at the toilet door and Uncle Ira, who was the
oldest and maybe everyone’s ideal, walked over to Patterson.

They were all obviously carrying guns.






Uncle Ira said to my mother, “Here, Bibbi. Here’s this
nigger Patterson. Come over here and beat his ass.”

She crashed the man’s head with a policeman’s billy
enough to leave him just this side of death. There was no
police investigation nor social reprobation.

After all, didn’t Grandfather champion their wild tem-
pers, and wasn’t Grandmother a near-white woman with
police pull?

T admit that I was thrilled by their meanness. They beat
up whites and Blacks with the same abandon, and liked each
other so much that they never needed to learn the art of
making outside friends. My mother was the only warm, out-
going personality among her siblings. Grandfather became
bedridden during our stay there, and his children spent their
free time telling him jokes, gossiping with him and showing
their love.

Uncle Tommy, who was gruff and chewed his words like
Grandfather, was my favorite. He strung ordinary sentences
together and they came out sounding either like the most pro-
fane curses or like comical poetry. A natural comedian, he
never waited for the laugh that he knew must follow his droll
statements. Fle was never cruel. He was mean.

When we played handball on the side of our house, Uncle

“Fommy would turn the corner, coming from work. He

would pretend at first not to see us, but with the deftness of a
cat he would catch the ball and say, “Put your minds where
your behinds are, and I'll let you on my team.” We children
would range around him, but it was only when he reached the
steps that he’d wind up his arm and throw the ball over the
light post and toward the stars.

He told me often, “Ritie, don’t worry ’cause you ain’t
pretty. Plenty pretty women I seen digging ditches or worse.

You smart. I swear to God, I rather you have a good mind
than a cute behind.”

They bragged often about the binding quality of the
Baxter blood. Uncle Tommy said that even the children felt it
before they were old enough to be taught. They reminisced
over Bailey’s teaching me to walk when he was less than three.
Displeased at my stumbling motions, he was supposed to have
said, “This is my sister. / have to teach her to walk.” They also
told me how I got the name “My.” After Bailey learned defi-
nitely that I was his sister, he refused to call me Marguerite,
but rather addressed me each time as “Mya Sister,” and in
later more articulate years, after the need for brevity had
shortened the appellation to “My,” it was elaborated into
“Maya.”

We lived in a big house on Caroline Street with our
grandparents for half the year before Mother moved us in
with her. Moving from the house where the family was cen-
tered meant absolutely nothing to me. It was simply a small
pattern in the grand design of our lives. If other children
didn’t move so much, it just went to show that our lives were
fated to be different from everyone else’s in the world. The
new house was no stranger than the other, except that we
were with Mother.

Bailey persisted in calling her Mother Dear until the cir-
cumstance of proximity softened the phrase’s formality to
“Muh Dear,” and finally to “M’Deah.” I could never put
my finger on her realness. She was so pretty and so quick
that even when she had just awakened, her eyes full of sleep
and hair tousled, I thought she looked just like the Virgin
Mary. But what mother and daughter understand each
other, or even have the sympathy for each other’s lack of
understanding?




Mother had prepared a place for us, and we went to it
gratefully. We each had a room with a two-sheeted bed,
plenty to eat and store-bought clothes to wear. And after all,
she didn’t have to do it. If we got on her nerves or if we were
disobedient, she could always send us back to Stamps. The
weight of appreciation and the threat, which was never
spoken, of a return to Momma were burdens that clogged my
childish wits into impassivity. I was called Old Lady and
chided for moving and talking like winter’s molasses.

Mother’s boyfriend, Mr. Freeman, lived with us, or we
lived with him (I never quite knew which). He was a South-
erner, too, and big. But a little flabby. His breasts used to
embarrass me when he walked around in his undershirt.
They lay on his chest like flat titties.

Even if Mother hadn’t been such a pretty woman, light-
skinned with straight hair, he was lucky to get her, and he
knew it. She was educated, from a well-known family, and
after all, wasn’t she born in St. Louis? Then she was gay. She
laughed all the time and made jokes. He was grateful. I think
he must have been many years older than she, but if not, he
had the sluggish inferiority of old men married to younger
women. He watched her every move and when she left the
room, his eyes allowed her reluctantly to go.

