CHAPTER 32
wey



1 SPENT the day wandering aimlessly through the bright
streets. The noisy penny arcades with their gaggle-giggle of
sailors and children and the games of chance were tempting,
but after walking through one of them it was obvious that I
could only win more chances and no money. I went to the
library and used a part of my day reading science fiction, and
in its marble washroom I changed my bandage.

On one flat street f passed a junkyard, littered with the
carcasses of old cars. The dead hulks were somehow so
uninviting that I decided to inspect them. As I wound my way
through the discards a temporary solution sprang to my mind.
I would find a clean or cleanish car and spend the night in it.
With the optimism of ignorance I thought that the morning
was bound to bring a more pleasant solution. A tall-bodied
gray car near the fence caught my eye. Its seats were untorn,
and although it had no wheels or rims it sat evenly on its
fenders. The idea of sleeping in the near open bolstered my
sense of freedom. I was a loose kite in a gentle wind floating
with only my will for an anchor. After deciding upon the car,




I got inside and ate the tuna sandwiches and then searched the
floorboards for holes. The fear that rats might scurry in and
eat off my nose as [ slept (some cases had been recently
reported in the papers) was more alarming than the shadowed
hulks in the junkyard or the quickly descending night. My
gray choice, however, seemed rat-tight, and I abandoned my
idea of taking another walk and decided to sit steady and wait
for sleep.

My car was an island and the junkyard a sea, and I was all
alone and full of warm. The mainland was just a decision
away. As evening became definite the street lamps flashed on
and the lights of moving cars squared my world in a piercing
probing. I counted the headlights and said my prayers and fell
asleep.

The morning’s brightness drew me awake and I was sur-
rounded with strangeness. I had slid down the seat and slept
the night through in an ungainly position. Wrestling with my
body to assume an upward arrangement, I saw a collage of
Negro, Mexican and white faces outside the windows. They
were laughing and making the mouth gestures of talkers but
their sounds didn’t penetrate my refuge. There was so much
curiosity evident in their features that I knew they wouldn’t
just go away before they knew who I was, so I opened the

. door, prepared to give them any story (even the truth) that

would buy my peace.

The windows and my grogginess had distorted their fea-
tures. | had thought they were adults and maybe citizens of
Brobdingnag, at least. Standing outside, I found there was
only one person taller than I, and that I was only a few years
younger than any of them. I was asked my name, where I
came from and what led me to the junkyard. They accepted
my explanation that I was from San Francisco, that my name

was Marguerite but that I was called Maya and | simply had
no place to stay. With a generous gesture the tall boy, who said
he was Bootsie, welcomed me, and said I could stay as long as
I honored their rule: No two people of opposite sex slept
together. In fact, unless it rained, everyone had his own pri-
vate sleeping accommodations. Since some of the cars leaked,
bad weather forced a doubling up. There was no stealing, not
for reasons of morality but because a crime would bring the
police to the yard; and since everyone was underage, there was
the likelihood that they’d be sent off to foster homes or juve-
nile delinquent courts. Everyone worked at something. Most
of the girls collected bottles and worked weekends in greasy
spoons. The boys mowed lawns, swept out pool halls and ran
errands for small Negro-owned stores. All money was held by
Bootsie and used communally.

During the month that I spent in the yard IJ learned to
drive (one boy’s older brother owned a car that moved), to
curse and to dance. Lee Arthur was the only boy who ran
around with the gang but lived at home with his mother. Mrs.
Arthur worked nights, so on Friday evening all the girls went
to his house for a bath. We did our laundry in the Laun-
dromat, but those things that required ironing were taken to
Lee’s house and the ironing chore was shared, as was every-
thing else.

On Saturday night we entered the jitterbug contest at the
Silver Shipper, whether we could dance or not. The prizes
were tempting ($25 to first couple, $10 to second and $5 to
third), and Bootsie reasoned that if all of us entered we had a
better chance. Juan, the Mexican boy, was my partner, and
although he couldn’t dance any better than I, we were a sensa-
tion on the floor. He was very short with a shock of straight
black hair that swished around his head when he pivoted, and




I was thin and black and tall as a tree. On my last weekend at
the yard, we actually won the second prize. The dance we per-
formed could never be duplicated or described except to say
that the passion with which we threw each other around the
small dance area was similar to the zeal shown in honest wres-
tling matches and hand-to-hand combat.

After a month my thinking processes had so changed that
I was hardly recognizable to myself. The unquestioning
acceptance by my peers had dislodged the familiar insecurity.
Odd that the homeless children, the silt of war frenzy, could
initiate me into the brotherhood of man. After hunting down
unbroken bottles and selling them with a white girl from Mis-
souri, a Mexican girl from Los Angeles and a Black girl from
Oklahoma, I was never again to sense myself so solidly outside
the pale of the human race. The lack of criticism evidenced by
our ad hoc community influenced me, and set a tone of toler-
ance for my life.

I telephoned Mother (her voice reminded me of another
world) and asked her to send for me. When she said she was
going to send my air ticket to Daddy, I explained that it would
be easier if she simply sent my fare to the airline, then I’d pick
it up. With the easy grace characteristic of Mother when she
was given a chance to be magnanimous she agreed.

The unrestrained life we had led made me believe that my
new friends would be undemonstrative about my leaving. I
was right. After I picked up my ticket I announced rather
casually that I would be leaving the following day. My revela-
tion was accepted with at least the equal amount of detach-
ment (only it was not a pose) and everyone wished me well. ]
didn’t want to say goodbye to the junkyard or to my car, so I
spent my last night at an all-night movie. One girl, whose
name and face have melted into the years, gave me “an

all-enduring friendship ring,” and Juan gave me a black lace
handkerchief just in case I wanted to go to church sometime.

I arrived in San Francisco, leaner than usual, fairly
unkempt, and with no luggage. Mother took one look and
said, “Is the rationing that bad at your father’s? You'd better
have some food to stick to all those bones.” She, as she called it,
turned to, and soon I sat ata clothed table with bowls of food,
expressly cooked for me.

I was at a home, again. And my mother was a fine lady.
Dolores was a fool and, more important, a liar.



