CHAPTER 20

Se



“Acka Backa, Sody Cracka
Acka Backa, Boo
Acka Backa, Sody Cracka

I’m in love with you.”

THe sounds of tag beat through the trees while the top
branches waved in contrapuntal rhythms. I lay on a moment
of green grass and telescoped the children’s game to my vision.
The girls ran about wild, now here, now there, never here,
never was, they seemed to have no more direction than a

‘splattered egg. But it was a shared if seldom voiced know!l-

edge that all movements fitted, and worked according to a
larger plan. I raised a platform for my mind’s eye and mar-
veled down on the outcome of “Acka Backa.” The gay picnic
dresses dashed, stopped and darted like beautiful dragonflies
over a dark pool. The boys, black whips in the sunlight,
popped behind the trees where their girls had fled, half
hidden and throbbing in the shadows.

The summer picnic fish fry in the clearing by the pond

was the biggest outdoor event of the year. Everyone was
there. All churches were represented, as well as the social
groups (Elks, Eastern Star, Masons, Knights of Columbus,
Daughters of Pythias), professional people (Negro teachers
from Lafayette County) and all the excited children.

Musicians brought cigar-box guitars, harmonicas, juice
harps, combs wrapped in tissue paper and even bathtub
basses.

The amount and variety of foods would have found
approval on the menu of a Roman epicure. Pans of fried
chicken, covered with dishtowels, sat under benches next to a
mountain of potato salad crammed with hard-boiled eggs.
Whole rust-red sticks of bologna were clothed in cheese-cloth.
Homemade pickles and chow-chow, and baked country
hams, aromatic with cloves and pineapples, vied for promi-
nence, Our steady customers had ordered cold watermelons,
so Bailey and I chugged the striped-green fruit into the Coca-
Cola box and filled all the tubs with ice as well as the big black
wash pot that Momma used to boil her laundry. Now they too
lay sweating in the happy afternoon air.

The summer picnic gave ladies a chance to show off their
baking hands. On the barbecue pit, chickens and spareribs
sputtered in their own fat and a sauce whose recipe was
guarded in the family like a scandalous affair. However, in
the ecumenical light of the summer picnic every true baking
artist could reveal her prize to the delight and criticism of the
town. Orange sponge cakes and dark brown mounds dripping
Hershey’s chocolate stood layer to layer with ice-white
coconuts and light brown caramels. Pound cakes sagged with
their buttery weight and small children could no more resist
licking the icings than their mothers could avoid slapping the
sticky fingers.




Proven fishermen and weekend amateurs sat on the
trunks of trees at the pond. They pulled the struggling bass
and the silver perch from the swift water. A rotating crew of
young girls scaled and cleaned the catch and busy women in
starched aprons salted and rolled the fish in corn meal, then
dropped them in Dutch ovens trembling with boiling fat.

On one corner of the clearing a gospel group was
rehearsing. Their harmony, packed as tight as sardines,
floated over the music of the county singers and melted into
the songs of the small children’s ring games.

“Boys, don’chew let that ball fall on none of my cakes, you
do and it’ll be me on you.”

“Yes, ma’am,” and nothing changed. The boys continued
hitting the tennis ball with pailings snatched from a fence and
running holes in the ground, colliding with everyone.

I had wanted to bring something to read, but Momma
said if I didn’t want to play with the other children I could
make myself useful by cleaning fish or bringing water from
the nearest well or wood for the barbecue.

I wandered into a retreat by accident. Signs with arrows
around the barbecue pit pointed MEN, WOMEN, CHILDREN
toward fading lanes, grown over since last year. Feeling ages
old and very wise at ten, I couldn’t allow myself to be found by
small children squatting behind a tree. Neither did I have the
nerve to follow the arrow pointing the way for women. If any
grownup had caught me there, it was possible that she’d think
I was being “womanish” and would report me to Momma,
and I knew what I could expect from her. So when the urge
hit me to relieve myself, I headed toward another direction.
Once through the wall of sycamore trees I found myself in a
clearing ten times smaller than the picnic area, and cool and
quiet. After my business was taken care of, I found a seat

between two protruding roots of a black walnut tree and
leaned back on its trunk. Heaven would be like that for the
deserving. Maybe California too. Looking straight up at the
uneven circle of sky, I began to sense that I might be falling
into a blue cloud, far away. The children’s voices and the thick
odor of food cooking over open fire were the hooks I grabbed
just in time to save myself.

Grass squeaked and I jumped at being found. Louise
Kendricks walked into my grove. I didn’t know that she too
was escaping the gay spirit. We were the same age and she and
her mother lived in a neat little bungalow behind the school.
Her cousins, who were in our age group, were wealthier and
fairer, but I had secretly believed Louise to be the prettiest
female in Stamps, next to Mrs. Flowers.

“What you doing sitting here by yourself, Marguerite?”
She didn’t accuse, she asked for information. I said that I was
watching the sky. She asked, “What for?” There was obvi-
ously no answer to a question like that, so I didn’t make up
one. Louise reminded me of Jane Eyre. Her mother lived in
reduced circumstances, but she was genteel, and though she
worked as a maid I decided she should be called a governess
and did so to Bailey and myself. (Who could teach a romantic
dreamy ten-year-old to call a spade a spade?) Mrs. Kend-
ricks could not have been very old, but to me all people over
eighteen were adults and there could be no degree given or
taken. They had to be catered to and pampered with polite-
ness, then they had to stay in the same category of lookalike,
soundalike and beingalike. Louise was a lonely girl, although
she had plenty of playmates and was a ready partner for any
ring game in the schoolyard.

Her face, which was long and dark chocolate brown, had
a thin sheet of sadness over it, as light but as permanent as the




viewing gauze on a coffin. And her eyes, which I thought her
best feature, shifted quickly as if what they sought had just a
second before eluded her.

She had come near and the spotted light through the trees
fell on her face and braids in running splotches. I had never
noticed before, but she looked exactly like Bailey. Her hair
was “good”——more straight than kinky——and her features had
the regularity of objects placed by a careful hand.

She looked up—“Well, you can’t see much sky from
here.” Then she sat down, an arm away from me. Finding two
exposed roots, she laid thin wrists on them as if she had been
in an easy chair. Slowly she leaned back against the tree. I
closed my eyes and thought of the necessity of finding another
place and the unlikehood of there being another with all the
qualifications that this one had. There was a little peal of a
scream and before I could open my eyes Louise had grabbed
my hand. “I was falling”—-she shook her long braids—“I was
falling in the sky.”

I liked her for being able to fall in the sky and admit it. I
suggested, “Let’s try together. But we have to sit up straight
on the count of five.” Louise asked, “Want to hold hands? Just
in case?” I did. If one of us did happen to fall, the other could
pull her out.

After a few near tumbles into eternity (both of us knew
what it was), we laughed at having played with death and
destruction and escaped.

Louise said, “Let’s look at that old sky while we’re spin-
ning.” We took each other’s hands in the center of the clearing
and began turning around. Very slowly at first. We raised our
chins and looked straight at the seductive patch of blue.
Faster, just a little faster, then faster, faster yet. Yes, help, we
were falling. Then eternity won, after all. We couldn’t stop

spinning or falling until I was jerked out of her grasp by
greedy gravity and thrown to my fate below—no, above, not
below. I found myself safe and dizzy at the foot of the
sycamore tree. Louise had ended on her knees at the other side
of the grove.

This was surely the time to laugh. We lost but we hadn’t
lost anything. First we were giggling and crawling drunkenly
toward each other and then we were laughing out loud
uproariously. We slapped each other on the back and shoul-
ders and laughed some more. We had made a fool or a liar out
of something, and didn’t that just beat all?

In daring to challenge the unknown with me, she became
my first friend. We spent tedious hours teaching ourselves the
Tut language. You (Yak oh you) know (kack nug oh wug)
what (wack hash a tut). Since all the other children spoke Pig
Latin, we were superior because Tut was hard to speak and
even harder to understand. At last I began to comprehend
what girls giggled about. Louise would rattle of a few sen-
tences to me in the unintelligible Tut language and would
laugh. Naturally I laughed too. Snickered, really, under-
standing nothing. I don’t think she understood half of what
she was saying herself, but, after all, girls have to giggle, and
after being a woman for three years I was about to become
a girl.

IN school one day, a girl whom I barely knew and had scarcely
spoken to brought me a note. The intricate fold indicated that
it was a love note. I was sure she had the wrong person, but
she insisted. Picking the paper loose, I confessed to myself that
I was frightened. Suppose it was somebody being funny? Sup-
pose the paper would show a hideous beast and the word
YOU written over it. Children did that sometimes just




because they claimed I was stuck-up. Fortunately I had got

permission to go to the toilet—an outside job—and in the
reeking gloom I read:

Dear Friend, MJ.

Times are hard and friends are few
I take great pleasure in writing you
Will you be my Valentine?

Tommy Vaidon

1 pulled my mind apart. Who? Who was Tommy Valdon?
Finally a face dragged itself from my memory. He was the
nice-looking brown-skinned boy who lived across the pond.
As soon as I had pinned him down, I began to wonder, Why?
Why me? Was it a joke? But if Tommy was the boy I remem-
bered he was a very sober person and a good student. Well,
then, it wasn’t a joke. All right, what evil dirty things did he
have in mind? My questions fell over themselves, an army in
retreat. Haste, dig for cover. Protect your flanks. Don’t let the
enemy close the gap between you. What did a Valentine do,
anyway?

. Starting to throw the paper in the foul-smelling hole, I
thought of Louise. I could show it to her. I folded the paper
back in the original creases, and went back to class. There was
no time during the lunch period since I had to run to the Store
and wait on customers. The note was in my sock and every
time Momma looked at me, I feared that her church gaze
might have turned into X-ray vision and she could not only
see the note and read its message but would interpret it as
well. I felt myself slipping down a sheer cliff of guilt, and a

second time I nearly destroyed the note but there was no
opportunity. The take-up bell rang and Bailey raced me to
school, so the note was forgotten. But serious business is
serious, and it had to be atrended to. After classes I waited for
Louise. She was talking to a group of girls, laughing. But
when I gave her our signal (two waves of the left hand) she
said good-bye to them and joined me in the road. I didn’t give
her the chance to ask what was on my mind (her favorite
question); I simply gave her the note. Recognizing the fold she
stopped smiling. We were in deep waters. She opened the
letter and read it aloud twice. “Well, what do you think?”

I said, “What do I think? That’s what I’m asking you?
What is there to think?”

“Looks like he wants you to be his valentine.”

“Louise, I can read. But what does it mean?”

“Oh, you know. His valentine. His love.”

There was that hateful word again. That treacherous
word that yawned up at you like a volcano.

“Well, I won’t. Most decidedly I won’t. Not ever again.”

“Have you been his valentine before? What do you mean
never again?”

I couldn’t lie to my friend and I wasn’t about to freshen
old ghosts.

“Well, don’t answer him then, and that’s the end of it.” I
was a little relieved that she thought it could be gotten rid of
so quickly. I tore the note in half and gave her a part. Walking
down the hill we minced the paper in a thousand shreds and
gave it to the wind.

Two days later a monitor came into my classroom. She
spoke quietly to Miss Williams, our teacher. Miss Williams
said, “Class, I believe you remember that tomorrow is Valen-
tine’s Day, so named for St. Valentine, the martyr, who died




around A.D, 270 in Rome. The day is observed by exchanging
tokens of affection, and cards. The eight-grade children have
completed theirs and the monitor is acting as mailman. You
will be given cardboard, ribbon and red tissue paper during
the last period today so that you may make your gifts. Glue
and scissors are here at the work table. Now, stand when your
name is called,”

She had been shuffling the colored envelopes and calling
names for some time before I noticed. I had been thinking of
yesterday’s plain invitation and the expeditious way Louise
and I took care of it.

We who were being called to receive valentines were only
slightly more embarrassed than those who sat and watched as
Miss Williams opened each envelope. “Helen Gray.” Helen
Gray, a tall, dull girl from Louisville, Ainched. “Dear Valen-
tine”-Miss Williams began reading the badly rhymed
childish drivel. I seethed with shame and anticipation and yet
had time to be offended at the silly poetry that I could have
bettered in my sleep.

“Margue-you-reete Ann Johnson. My goodness, this looks
more like a letter than a valentine. ‘Dear Friend, I wrote youa
letter and saw you tear it up with your friend Miss L. I don’t
believe you meant to hurt my feelings so whether you answer
or not you will always be my valentine. T.V.’”

“Class”—Miss Williams smirked and continued lazily
without giving us permission to sit down-——“although you are
only in the seventh grade, I’m sure you wouldn’t be so pre-
sumptuous as to sign a letter with an initial. But here is a boy
in the eight grade, about to graduate—blah, blah, blooey,
blah. You may collect your valentines and these letters on your
way out.”

It was a nice letter and Tommy had beautiful penmanship.

I was sorry I tore up the first. His statement that whether
I answered him or not would not influence his affection
reassured me. He couldn’t be after you-know-what if he talked
like that. I told Louise that the next time he came to the Store I
was going to say something extra nice to him. Unfortunately
the situation was so wonderful to me that each time I saw
Tommy I melted in delicious giggles and was unable to form a
coherent sentence. After a while he stopped including me in
his general glances.



