CHAPTER 8

Sey



Stamps, Arkansas, was Chitlin’ Switch, Georgia; Hang "Em
High, Alabama; Don’t Let the Sun Set on You Here, Nigger,
Mississippi; or any other name just as descriptive. People in
Stamps used to say that the whites in our town were so preju-
diced that a Negro couldn’t buy vanilla ice cream. Except on
July Fourth. Other days he had to be satisfied with chocolate.
A light shade had been pulled down between the Black
community and all things white, but one could see through it

enough to develop a fear-admiration-contempt for the white

“things”—white folks’ cars and white glistening houses and

their children and their women. But above all, their wealth
that allowed them to waste was the most enviable. They had
so many clothes they were able to give perfectly good dresses,
worn just under the arms, to the sewing class at our school for
the larger girls to practice on.

Although there was always generosity in the Negro neigh-
borhood, it was indulged on pain of sacrifice. Whatever was

given by Black people to other Blacks was most probably

needed as desperately by the donor as by the receiver. A fact
which made the giving or receiving a rich exchange.

I couldn’t understand whites and where they got the
right to spend money so lavishly. Of course, I knew God was
white too, but no one could have made me believe he was
prejudiced. My grandmother had more moncy than all the
powhitetrash. We owned land and houses, but each day Bailey
and I were cautioned, “Waste not, want not.”

Momma bought two bolts of cloth each year for winter
and summer clothes. She made my school dresses, underslips,
bloomers, handkerchiefs, Bailey’s shirts, shorts, her aprons,
house dresses and waists from the rolls shipped to Stamps by
Sears and Roebuck. Uncle Willie was the only person in the
family who wore ready-to-wear clothes all the time. Each day,
he wore fresh white shirts and flowered suspenders, and his
special shoes cost twenty dollars. I thought Uncle Willie sin-
fully vain, especially when I had to iron seven stiff starched
shirts and not leave a cat’s face anywhere.

During the summer we went barefoot, except on Sunday,
and we learned to resole our shoes when they “gave out,” as
Momma used to say. The Depression must have hit the white
section of Stamps with cyclonic impact, but it seeped into the
Black area slowly, like a thief with misgivings. The country
had been in the throes of the Depression for two years before
the Negroes in Stamps knew it. I think that everyone thought
that the Depression, like everything else, was for the white-
folks, so it had nothing to do with them. Our people had lived
off the land and counted on cotton-picking and hoeing and
chopping seasons to bring in the cash needed to buy shoes,
clothes, books and light farm equipment. It was when the
owners of cotton fields dropped the payment of ten cents for a
pound of cotton to eight, seven and finally five that the Negro




community realized that the Depression, at least, did not
discriminate.

Welfare agencies gave food to the poor families, Black and
white. Gallons of lard, flour, salt, powdered eggs and pow-
dered milk. People stopped trying to raise hogs because it was
too difficult to get slop rich enough to feed them, and no one
had the money to buy mash or fish meal.

Momma spent many nights figuring on our tablets, slowly.
She was trying to find a way to keep her business going,
although her customers had no money. When she came to her
conclusions, she said, “Bailey, I want you to make me a nice
clear sign. Nice and neat. And Sister, you can color it with
your Crayolas. I want it to say:

1 5 LB. CAN OF POWDERED MILK IS WORTH 50¢ IN TRADE
1 5 LB. CAN OF POWDERED EGGS Is WORTH $1.00 IN TRADE
10 #2 CANS OF MACKEREL Is WORTH $1.00 IN TRADE.”

AND so on. Momma kept her store going. Our customers
didn’t even have to take their slated provisions home. They'd
pick them up from the welfare center downtown and drop
them off at the Store. If they didn’t want an exchange at the
moment they’d put down in one of the big gray ledgers the
amount of credit coming to them. We were among the few
Negro families not on relief, but Bailey and I were the only
children in the town proper that we knew who ate powdered
eggs every day and drank the powdered milk.

Our playmates’ families exchanged their unwanted food
for sugar, coal oil, spices, potted meat, Vienna sausage, peanut
butter, soda crackers, toilet soap and even laundry soap. We
were always given enough to eat, but we both hated the lumpy
milk and mushy eggs, and sometimes we'd stop off at the

house of one of the poorer families to get some peanut butter
and crackers. Stamps was as slow coming out of the Depres-
sion as it had been getting into it. World War II was well
along before there was a noticeable change in the economy of
that near-forgotten hamlet.

One Christmas we received gifts from our mother and father,
who lived separately in a heaven called California, where we
were told they could have all the oranges they could eat. And
the sun shone all the time. I was sure that wasn’t so. I couldn’t
believe that our mother would laugh and eat oranges in the
sunshine without her children. Until that Christmas when we
received the gifts I had been confident that they were both
dead. I could cry anytime I wanted by picturing my mother (I
didn’t quite know what she looked like) lying in her coffin.
Her hair, which was black, was spread out on a tiny little
white pillow and her body was covered with a sheet. The
face was brown, like a big O, and since I couldn’t fill in the
features I printed M o T H E R across the O, and tears would
fall down my cheeks like warm milk.

Then came that terrible Christmas with its awful presents
when our father, with the vanity I was to find typical, sent his
photograph. My gift from Mother was a tea set—a teapot,
four cups and saucers and tiny spoons—and a doll with blue
eyes and rosy checks and yellow hair painted on her head. I
didn’t know what Bailey received, but after I opened my
boxes I went out to the backyard behind the chinaberry tree.
The day was cold and the air as clear as water. Frost was still
on the bench but I sat down and cried. I looked up and Bailey
was coming from the outhouse, wiping his eyes. He had been
crying too. I didn’t know if he had also told himself they were
dead and had been rudely awakened to the truth or whether




he was just feeling lonely. The gifts opened the door to ques-
tions that neither of us wanted to ask. Why did they send us
away? and What did we do so wrong? So Wrong? Why, at
three and four, did we have tags put on our arms to be sent
by train alone from Long Beach, California, to Stamps,
Arkansas, with only the porter to look after us? (Besides, he
got off in Arizona.)

Bailey sat down beside me, and that time didn’t admonish
me not to cry. So I wept and he sniffed a little, but we didn’t
talk until Momma called us back in the house.

Momma stood in front of the tree that we had decorated
with silver ropes and pretty colored balls and said, “You chil-
dren is the most ungrateful things I ever did see. You think
your momma and poppa went to all the trouble to send you
these nice play pretties to make you go out in the cold and
cry?”

Neither of us said a word. Momma continued, “Sister, I
know you tender-hearted, but Bailey Junior, there’s no reason
for you to set out mewing like a pussy cat, just cause you got
something from Vivian and Big Bailey.” When we still didn’t
force ourselves to answer, she asked, “You want me to tell
Santa Claus to take these things back?” A wretched feeling of
being torn engulfed me. I wanted to scream, “Yes. Tell him to
take them back.” But I didn’t move.

Later Bailey and I talked. He said if the things really did
come from Mother maybe it meant that she was getting ready
to come and get us. Maybe she had just been angry at some-
thing we had done, but was forgiving us and would send for
us soon, Bailey and I tore the stuffing out of the doll the day
after Christmas, but he warned me that I had to keep the tea
set in good condition because any day or night she might come
riding up.

