CHAPTER 29

Sey



Our house was a fourteen-room typical San Franciscan post-
Earthquake affair. We had a succession of roomers, bringing
and taking their different accents, and personalities and foods.
Shipyard workers clanked up the stairs (we all slept on the
second floor except Mother and Daddy Clidell) in their steel-
tipped boots and metal hats, and gave way to much-powdered
prostitutes, who giggled through their make-up and hung
their wigs on the doorknobs. One couple (they were college
graduates) held long adult conversations with me in the big
kitchen downstairs, until the husband went off to war. Then
the wife who had been so charming and ready to smile
changed into a silent shadow that played infrequently along
the walls. An older couple lived with us for a year or so. They
owned a restaurant and had no personality to enchant or
interest a teenager, except that the husband was called Uncle
Jim, and the wife Aunt Boy. I never figured that out.

The quality of strength lined with tenderness is an
unbeatable combination, as are intelligence and necessity
when unblunted by formal education. I was prepared to




accept Daddy Clidell as one more faceless name added to
Mother’s roster of conquests. I had trained myself so success-
fully through the years to display interest, or at least attention,
while my mind skipped free on other subjects that I could
have lived in his house without ever seeing him and without
his becoming the wiser. But his character beckoned and
elicited admiration. He was a simple man who had no inferi-
ority complex about his lack of education and, even more
amazing, no superiority complex because he had succeeded
despite that lack. He would say often, “I been to school three
years in my life. In Slaten, Texas, times was hard, and I had to
help my daddy on the farm.”

No recriminations lay hidden under the plain statement,
nor was there boasting when he said, “If I’m living a little
better now, it’s because I treats everybody right.”

He owned apartment buildings and, later, pool halls, and
was famous for being that rarity “a man of honor.” He didn’t
suffer, as many “honest men” do, from the detestable righ-
teousness that diminishes their virtue. He knew cards and
men’s hearts. So during the age when Mother was exposing us
to certain facts of life, like personal hygiene, proper posture,
table manners, good restaurants and tipping practices, Daddy
Clidell taught me to play poker, blackjack, tonk and high,
low, Jick, Jack and the Game. He wore expensively tailored
suits and a large yellow diamond stickpin. Except for the jew-
elry, he was a conservative dresser and carried himself with
the unconscious pomp of a man of secure means. Unexpect-
edly, I resembled him, and when he, Mother and I walked
down the street his friends often said, “Clidell, that’s sure your
daughter. Ain’t no way you can deny her.”

Proud laughter followed those declarations, for he had
never had children. Because of his late-arriving but intense

paternal sense, I was introduced to the most colorful charac-
ters in the Black underground. One afternoon, I was invited
into our smoke-filled dining room to make the acquaintance
of Stonewall Jimmy, Just Black, Cool Clyde, Tight Coat and
Red Leg. Daddy Clidell explained to me that they were the
most successful con men in the world, and they were going to
tell me about some games so that I would never be “anybody’s
mark.”

To begin, one man warned me, “There ain’t never been a
mark yet that didn’t want something for nothing.” Then they
took turns showing me their tricks, how they chose their vic-
tims (marks) from the wealthy bigoted whites and in every
case how they used the victims’ prejudice against them.

Some of the tales were funny, a few were pathetic, but all
were amusing or gratifying to me, for the Black man, the con
man who could act the most stupid, won out every time over
the powerful, arrogant white.

I remember Mr. Red Leg’s story like a favorite melody.

“Anything that works against you can also work for you
once you understand the Principle of Reverse.

“There was a cracker in Tulsa who bilked so many
Negroes he could set up a Negro Bilking Company. Naturally
he got to thinking, Black Skin means Damn Fool. Just Black
and I went to Tulsa to check him out. Come to find out, he’s a
perfect mark. His momma must have been scared in an
Indian massacre in Africa. He hated Negroes only a little
more than he despised Indians. And he was greedy.

“Black and I studied him and decided he was worth set-
ting up against the store. That means we were ready to put out
a few thousand dollars in preparation. We pulled in a white
boy from New York, a good con artist, and had him open an
office in Tulsa. He was supposed to be a Northern real estate




agent trying to buy up valuable land in Oklahoma. We inves-
tigated a piece of land near Tulsa that had a toll bridge
crossing it. It used to be part of an Indian reservation but had
been taken over by the state.

“Just Black was laid out as the decoy, and I was going to
be the fool. After our friend from New York hired a secretary
and had his cards printed, Black approached the mark with a
proposition. He told him that he had heard that our mark was
the only white man colored people could trust. He named
some of the poor fools that had been taken by that crook. It
just goes to show you how white folks can be deceived by their
own deception. The mark believed Black.

“Black told him about his friend who was half Indian and
half colored and how some Northern white estate agent had
found out that he was the sole owner of a piece of valuable
land and the Northerner wanted to buy it. At first the man
acted like he smelled a rat, but from the way he gobbled up
the proposition, turns out what he thought he smelled was
some nigger money on his top lip.

“He asked the whereabouts of the land but Black put him
off. He told his cracker that he just wanted to make sure that
he would be interested. The mark allowed how he was being
interested, so Black said he would tell his friend and they'd

‘get in touch with him. Black met the mark for about three

weeks in cars and in alleys and kept putting him off uncil the
white man was almost crazy with anxiety and greed and then
accidentally it seemed Black let drop the name of the
Northern real estate agent who wanted the property. From
that moment on we knew we had the big fish on the line and
all we had to do was to pull him in.

“We expected him to try to contact our store, which
he did. That cracker went to our setup and counted on his

whiteness to ally him with Spots, our white boy, but Spots
refused to talk about the deal except to say the land had been
thoroughly investigated by the biggest real estate concern in
the South and that if our mark did not go around raising dust
he would make sure that there would be a nice piece of money
in it for him. Any obvious inquiries as to the rightful owner-
ship of the land could alert the state and they would surely
push through a law prohibiting the sale. Spots told the mark
he would keep in touch with him. The mark went back to the
store three or four times but to no avail, then just before we
knew he would crack, Black brought me to see him. That fool
was as happy as a sissy in a C.C.C. camp. You would have
thought my neck was in a noose and he was about to light the
fire under my feet. I never enjoyed taking anybody so much.
“Anyhow, I played scary at first but Just Black told me
that this was one white man that our people could trust. I said
I did not trust no white man because all they wanted was to
get a chance to kill a Black man legally and get his wife in the
bed, (I’m sorry, Clidell.) The mark assured me that he was the
only white man who did not feel like that. Some of his best
friends were colored people. In fact, if I didn’t know it, the
woman who raised him was a colored woman and he still sees
her to this day. | let myself be convinced and then the mark
began to drag the Northern whites. He told me that they made
Negroes sleep in the street in the North and that they had to
clean out toilets with their hands in the North and even things
worse than that, I was shocked and said, ‘Then | don’t want
to sell my land to that white man who offered seventy-five
thousand dollars for it.’ Just Black said, ‘I wouldn’t know
what to do with that kind of money,’ and I said that all I
wanted was to have enough money to buy a home for my old
mom, to buy a business and to make one trip to Harlem, The




mark asked how much would that cost and I said I reckoned I
could do it on fifty thousand dollars.

“The mark told me no Negro was safe with that kind of
money. That white folks would take it from him. I said I
knew it but I had to have at least forty thousand dollars. He
agreed. We shook hands. I said it would do my heart good to
see the mean Yankee go down on some of ‘our land.’ We met
the next morning and I signed the deed in his car and he gave
me the cash.

“Black and I had kept most of our things in a hotel over in
Hot Springs, Arkansas. When the deal was closed we walked
to our car, drove across the state line and on to Hot Springs.

“That’s all there was to it.”

When he finished, more triumphant stories rainbowed
around the room riding the shoulders of laughter. By all
accounts those storytellers, born Black and male before the
turn of the twentieth century, should have been ground into
useless dust. Instead they used their intelligence to pry open
the door of rejection and not only became wealthy but got
some revenge in the bargain.

Tt wasn’t possible for me to regard them as criminals or be
anything but proud of their achievements.

The needs of a society determine its ethics, and in the
Black American ghettos the hero is that man who is offered
only the crumbs from his country’s table but by ingenuity and
courage is able to take for himself a Lucullan feast. Hence the
janitor who lives in one room but sports a robin’s-egg-blue
Cadillac is not laughed at but admired, and the domestic who
buys forty-dollar shoes is not criticized but is appreciated. We

know that they have put to use their full mental and physical

powers. Each single gain feeds into the gains of the body
collective.

Stories of law violations are weighed on a different set of
scales in the Black mind than in the white. Petty crimes
embarrass the community and many people wistfully wonder
why Negroes don’t rob more banks, embezzle more funds
and employ graft in the unions. “We are the victims of the
world’s most comprehensive robbery. Life demands a balance.
It’s all right if we do a little robbing now.” This belief appeals
particularly to one who is unable to compete legally with his
fellow citizens.

My education and that of my Black associates were quite
different from the education of our white schoolmates. In the
classroom we all learned past participles, but in the streets and
in our homes the Blacks learned to drop s’s from plurals and
suffixes from past-tense verbs. We were alert to the gap sepa-
rating the written word from the colloquial. We learned to
slide out of one language and into another without being con-
scious of the effort. At school, in a given situation, we might
respond with “That’s not unusual.” But in the street, meeting
the same situation, we easily said, “It be’s like that sometimes.”



