CHAPTER 30

Ey



Just like Jane Withers and Donald O’Connor I was going on
a vacation. Daddy Bailey invited me to spend the summer
with him in southern California and I was jumpy with excite-
ment. Given our father’s characteristic air of superiority, I
secretly expected him to live in a manor house surrounded by
grounds and serviced by a liveried staff.

Mother was all cooperation in helping me to shop for
summer clothes. With the haughtiness San Franciscans have
for people who live in the warmer climate, she explained that
all I needed were lots of shorts, pedal pushers, sandals and
blouses because “southern Californians hardly ever wear any-
thing else.”

Daddy Bailey had a girl friend, who had begun corre-
sponding with me some months before, and she was to meet
me at the train. We had agreed to wear white carnations to
identify each other, and the porter kept my flower in the
diner’s Frigidaire until we reached the small hot town.

On the platform my eyes skimmed over the whites and
searched among the Negroes who were walking up and down

expectantly. There were no men as tall as Daddy, and no
really glamorous ladies (I had decided that given his first
choice, all his succeeding women would be startlingly beau-
tiful). I saw a little girl who wore a white flower, but dis-
missed her as improbable. The platform emptied as we
walked by each other time after time. Finally she stopped me
with a disbelieving “Marguerite?” Her voice screeched with
shock and maturity. So, after all, she wasn’t a little girl. I, too,
was visited with unbelief.

She said, “I’m Dolores Stockland.”

Stunned but trying to be well mannered, I said, “Hello.
My name is Marguerite.”

Daddy’s girl friend? I guessed her to be in her early twen-
ties. Her crisp seersucker suit, spectator pumps and gloves
informed me that she was proper and serious. She was of
average height but with the unformed body of a girl and I
thought that if she was planning to marry our father she must
have been horrified to find herself with a nearly six-foot
prospective stepdaughter who was not even pretty. (I found
later that Daddy Bailey had told her that his children were
eight and nine years old and cute as buttons. She had such a
need to believe in him that even though we corresponded ata
time when I loved the multisyllabic words and convoluted
sentences she had been able to ignore the obvious.)

I was another link in a long chain of disappointments.
Daddy had promised to marry her but kept delaying until he
finally married a woman named Alberta, who was another
small tight woman from the South. When I met Dolores she
had all the poses of the Black bourgeoisie without the material
basis to support the postures. Instead of owning a manor
house and servants, Daddy lived in a trailer park on the out-
skirts of a town that was itself the outskirts of town. Dolores




lived there with him and kept the house clean with the order-
liness of a coffin. Artificial flowers reposed waxily in glass
vases. She was on close terms with her washing machine and
ironing board. Her hairdresser could count on absolute
fidelity and punctuality. In a word, but for intrusions her life
would have been perfect. And then I came along.

She tried hard to make me into something she could rea-
sonably accept. Her first attempt, which failed utterly, con-
cerned my attention to details. I was asked, cajoled, then
ordered to care for my room. My willingness to do so was
hampered by an abounding ignorance of how it should be
done and a fumbling awkwardness with small objects. The
dresser in my room was covered with little porcelain white
women holding parasols, china dogs, fat-bellied cupids and
blown-glass animals of every persuasion. After making the
bed, sweeping my room and hanging up the clothes, if and
when I remembered to dust the bric-a-brac, I unfailingly held
one too tightly and crunched off a leg or two, or too loosely
and dropped it, to shatter it into miserable pieces.

Daddy wore his amused impenetrable face constantly. He
seemed positively diabolic in his enjoyment of our discomfort.
Certainly Dolores adored her outsize lover, and his elocution
(Daddy Bailey never spoke, he orated), spiced with the rolling

-ers and errers, must have been some consolation to her in their

less-than-middle-class home. He worked in the kitchen of a
naval hospital and they both said he was a medical dietician
for the United States Navy. Their Frigidaire was always
stocked with newly acquired pieces of ham, half roasts and
quartered chickens. Dad was an excellent cook. He had been
in France during World War I and had also worked as
doorman at the exclusive Breakers’ Hotel; as a result he often
made Continental dinners. We sat down frequently to coq au

vin, prime ribs au jus, and cotelette Milanese with all the trim-
mings. His specialty, however, was Mexican food. He traveled
across the border weekly to pick up condiments and other
supplies that graced our table as pollo en salsa verde and
enchilada con carne.

If Dolores had been a little less aloof, a little more earthy,
she could have discovered that those ingredients were rife in
her town proper, and Dad had no need to travel to Mexico to
buy provisions. But she would not be caught so much as
looking into one of the crusty Mexican mercados, let alone ven-
turing inside its smelliness, And it also sounded ritzy to say,
“My husband, Mr. Johnson, the naval dietician, went over to
Mexico to buy some things for our dinner.” That goes over
large with other ritzy people who go to the white area to buy
artichokes.

Dad spoke fluent Spanish, and since I had studied for a
year we were able to converse slightly. I believe that my talent
with a foreign language was the only quality I had that
impressed Dolores. Her mouth was too taut and her tongue
too still to attempt the strange sounds. Admittedly, chough,
her English, like everything else about her, was absolutely
perfect.

We indulged in a test of strength for weeks as Dad stood
figuratively on the sidelines, neither cheering nor booing but
enjoying himself greatly. He asked me once if I “er liked errer
my mother.” T thought he meant my mother, so I answered
yes—she was beautiful and gay and very kind. He said he
wasn’t talking about Vivian, he meant Dolores. Then I
explained that I didn’t like her because she was mean and
petty and full of pretense. He laughed, and when I added she
didn’t like me because I was so tall and arrogant and wasn’t




clean enough for her, he laughed harder and said something
like “Well, that’s life.”

One evening he announced that on the next day he was
going to Mexico to buy food for the weekend. There was
nothing unusual about his pronouncement until he added that
he was taking me along. He filled the shocked silence with the
information that a trip to Mexico would give me an opportu-
nity to practice Spanish.

Dolores’ silence might have been brought on by a jealous
reaction, but mine was occasioned by pure surprise. My father
had not shown any particular pride in me and very little affec-
tion. He had not taken me to his friends or to southern Cali-
fornia’s few points of interest. It was incredible that I was to
be included in something as exotic as a trip to Mexico. Well, I
quickly reasoned, I deserved it. After all, I was his daughter
and my vacation fell far short of what I had expected a vaca-
tion to be. Had I protested that I would like Dolores to go
along, we might have been spared a display of violence and
near tragedy. But my young mind was filled with self, and my
imagination shivered at the prospect of seeing sombreros,
rancheros, tortillas and Pancho Villa. We spent a quiet night.
Dolores mended her perfect underwear, and I pretended to
read a novel. Dad listened to the radio with a drink in his
hand and watched what I now know was a pitiful spectacle.

In the morning, we set out on the foreign adventure. The
dirt roads of Mexico fulfilled all my longing for the unusual.
Only a few miles from California’s slick highways and, to me,
tall buildings, we were bumping along on gravel streets that
could have competed in crudeness with the worst paths in
Arkansas, and the landscape boasted adobe huts or cabins
walled with corrugated metal. Dogs, lean and dirty, slunk
around the houses, and children played innocently in the nude

or near nude with discarded rubber tires. Half the population
looked like Tyrone Power and Dolores Del Rio, and the other
half like Akim Tamiroff and Katina Paxinou, maybe only
fatter and older.

Dad gave no explanation as we drove through the border
town and headed for the interior. Although surprised, I
refused to indulge my curiosity by questioning him, After a
few miles we were stopped by a uniformed guard. He and
Dad exchanged familiar greetings and Dad got out of the car.
He reached back into the pocket of the door and took a bottle
of liquor into the guard’s kiosk. They laughed and talked for
over a half hour as I sat in the car and tried to translate the
muffled sounds. Eventually they came out and walked to the
car. Dad still had the bottle but it was only half full. He asked
the guard if he would like to marry me. Their Spanish was
choppier than my school version but I understood. My father
added as an inducement the fact that I was only fifteen years
old. At once the guard leaned into the car and caressed my
cheek. I supposed that he thought before that I was not only
ugly but old, too, and that now the knowledge that I was
probably unused attracted him. He told Dad that he would
marry me and we would have “many babies.” My father
found that promise the funniest thing he had heard since we
left home. (He had laughed uproariously when Dolores didn’t
answer my goodbye and I explained as we drove away that she
hadn’t heard.) The guard was not discouraged by my attempts
to get away from his probing hands and I would have
squirmed to the driver’s seat had not Dad opened the door
and got in. After many adids’s and bonitas and espositas Dad
started the car, and we were on our grimy way again.

Signs informed me that we were headed for Ensenada. In
those miles, along the twisted roads beside the steep mountain,




I feared that I would never get back to America, civilization,
English and wide streets again. He sipped from the bottle and
sang snatches of Mexican songs as we climbed the tortuous
mountain road. Our destination turned out not to be the town
of Ensenada, after all, but about five miles out of the city
limits. We pulled up in the dirt yard of a cantina where half-
clothed children chased mean-looking chickens around and
around. The noise of the car brought women to the door of
the ramshackle building but didn’t distract the single-minded
activity of either the grubby kids or the scrawny fowls.

A woman’s voice sang out, “Baylee, Baylee.” And sud-
denly a claque of women crowded to the door and overflowed
into the yard. Dad told me to get out of the car and we went to
meet the women. He explained quickly that I was his
daughter, which everyone thought to be uncontrollably funny.
We were herded into a long room with a bar at one end.
Tables sat lopsidedly on a loose-plank floor. The ceiling
caught and held my attention. Paper streamers in every pos-
sible color waved in the near-still air, and as I watched a few
fell to the floor. No one seemed to notice, or if they did, it was
obviously unimportant that their sky was falling in. There
were a few men on stools at the bar, and they greeted my
father with the ease of familiarity. | was taken around and
each person was told my name and age. The formal high
school “Cémo estd usted?” was received as the most charming
utterance possible. People clapped me on the back, shook
Dad’s hand and spoke a rat-a-tat Spanish that I was unable to
follow. Baylee was the hero of the hour, and as he warmed
under the uninhibited show of affection I saw a new side of
the man. His quizzical smile disappeared and he stopped his
affected way of talking (it would have been difficult to wedge
ers into that rapid Spanish).

It seemed hard to believe that he was a lonely person,
searching relentlessly in bottles, under women’s skirts, in
church work and lofty job titles for his “personal niche,” lost
before birth and unrecovered since. It was obvious to me then
that he had never belonged in Stamps, and less to the slow-
moving, slow-thinking Johnson family. How maddening it
was to have been born in a cotton field with aspirations of
grandeur.

In the Mexican bar, Dad had an air of relaxation which |
had never seen visit him before. There was no need to pretend
in front of those Mexican peasants. As he was, just being him-
self, he was suthciently impressive to them. He was an
American. He was Black. He spoke Spanish fluently. He
had money and he could drink tequila with the best of them.
The women liked him too. He was tall and handsome and
generous.

It was a fiesta party. Someone put money in the jukebox
and drinks were served to all the customers. I was given a
warm Coca-Cola. The music poured out of the record
machine as high-tenored voices wavered and held, wavered
and held for the passionate rancheros. Men danced, at farst
alone, then with each other and occasionally a woman would
join the foot-stomping rites. | was asked to dance. I hesitated
because I wasn’t sure I'd be able to follow the steps, but Dad
nodded and encouraged me to try. I had been enjoying myself
for at least an hour before I realized it. One young man had
taught me how to put a sticker on the ceiling. First, all the
sugar must be chewed out of Mexican gum, then the bar-
tender gives a few slips of paper to the aspirant, who writes
either a proverb or a sentimental remark on the strip. He
takes the soft gum from his mouth and sticks it to the end of
the streamer. Choosing a less densely covered area of the




ceiling he aims at the spot, and as he throws he lets out a
bloodcurdling scream which would not be out of place in a
bronco-busting rodeo. After a few squeaky misses, I overcame
my reserve and tore my tonsils loose with a yell that would
have been worthy of Zapata. | was happy, Dad was proud and
my new friends were gracious. A woman brought chicharrones
(in the South they’re called cracklings) in a greasy newspaper.
I ate the fried pig skins, danced, screamed and drank the
extra-sweet and sticky Coca-Cola with the nearest approach to
abandonment I had ever experienced. As new revelers joined
the celebration I was introduced as la nifia de Baylee, and as
quickly accepted. The afternoon sun failed in its attempt to
light the room through the single window, and the press of
bodies and scents and sounds melted to give us an aromatic
and artificial twilight. I realized that I hadn’t seen my father
for some time. “Dénde estd mi padre?” | asked my dancing
partner. My formal Spanish must have sounded as pretentious
to the ears of the paisano as “Whither goeth my sire?” would
have sounded to a semi-literate Ozark mountaineer. In any
case it brought on a howl of laughter, a bear-crushing embrace
and no answer. When the dance was finished, I made my way
through the squeeze of the people as unobtrusively as possible.
A fog of panic nearly suffocated me, He wasn’t in the room.
Had he made an arrangement with the guard back at the
pass? I would not put it beyond him. My drink had been
spiked. The certainty made my knees weak, and dancing
couples blurred before my eyes. Dad was gone. He was
probably halfway back home with the money from my sale in
his pocket. I had to get to the door, which seemed miles and
mountains away. People stopped me with “Dénde vas?” My
response was something as stiff and double meaning as “Yo

voy por ventilarme,” or “I am going to air out.” No wonder I
was a big hit.

Seen through the open door Dad’s Hudson sat in lonely
splendor. He hadn’t left me, after all. That meant, of course,
that I hadn’t been drugged. I immediately felt better. No one
followed me into the yard where the late afternoon sun had
tenderized the midday harshness. I decided to sit in his car
and wait for him since he couldn’t have gone far. I knew he
was with a woman, and the more I thought about it, it was
easy to figure which one of the gay sefioritas he had taken
away. There had been a small neat woman with very red lips
who clung to him avidly when we first arrived. I hadn’t
thought of it at the time but had simply recorded her pleasure.
In the car, in reflection, I played the scene back. She had been
the first to rush to him, and that was when he quickly said
“This is my daughter” and “She speaks Spanish.” If Dolores
knew, she would crawl up in her blanket of affectations and
die circumspectly. The thought of her mortification kept me
company for a long time, but the sounds of music and
laughter and Cisco Kid screams broke into my pleasant
revengeful reveries. It was, after all, getting dark and Dad
must have been beyond my reach in one of the little cabins out
back. An awkward fear crept up slowly as I] contemplated sit-
ting in the car all night alone. It was a fear distantly related to
the earlier panic. Terror did not engulf me wholly, but
crawled along my mind like a tedious paralysis. I could roll up
the windows and lock the door. I could lie down on the floor
of the car and make myself small and invisible. Impossible! I
tried to staunch the flood of fear. Why was I afraid of the
Mexicans? After all, they had been kind to me and surely my
father wouldn’t allow his daughter to be ill treated. Wouldn’t
he? Would he? How could he leave me in that raunchy bar




and go off with his woman? Did he care what happened to
me? Not a damn, I decided, and opened the flood gates for
hysteria. Once the tears began, there was no stopping them. I
was to die, after all, in a Mexican dirt yard. The special person
that I was, the intelligent mind that God and I had created
together, was to depart this life without recognition or contri-
bution. How pitiless were the Fates and how helpless was this
poor Black girl.

I made out his shadow in the near gloom and was about to
jump out and run to him when I noticed that he was being
propelled by the small woman I had seen earlier and a man.
He wobbled and lurched but they held him up firmly and
guided his staggering toward the door of the cantina. Once he
got inside we might never leave. I got out of the car and went
to them. I asked Dad if he wouldn’t like to get into the car and
rest a little. He focused enough to recognize me and answered
that that was exactly what he wanted; he was a little tired and
he’d like to rest before we set out for his place. He told his
friends his wishes in Spanish and they steered him to the car.
When I opened the front door he said No, he’d lie down on
the back seat for a little while. We got him into the car and
tried to arrange his long legs comfortably. He began snoring
even as we tugged at him. It sounded like the beginning of a
deep and long sleep, and a warning that, after all, we were to
spend the night in the car, in Mexico.

I thought fast as the couple laughed and jabbered at me in
incomprehensible Spanish. I had never driven a car before,
but I had watched carefully and my mother was declared to be
the best driver in San Francisco. Ske declared it, at least. ] was
superbly intelligent and had good physical coordination. Of
course I could drive. Idiots and lunatics drove cars, why not
the brilliant Marguerite Johnson? I asked the Mexican man to

turn the car around, again in my exquisite high school
Spanish, and it took about fifteen minutes to make myself
understood. The man must have asked me if | could drive, but
I didn’t know the Spanish for the verb “to drive,” so I kept
repeating “Sz, s2” and “Gracias” until he got in and headed the
car toward the highway. He showed his understanding of the
situation by his next action. He left the motor running. | put
my foot on the accelerator and clutch, jiggled the gear-shift
and raised both feet. With an ominous roar we leaped out of
the yard.

As we shook onto the shelf of the road the car nearly
stalled and I stamped both feet again on the pedal and clutch.
We made no progress and an awful amount of noise, but the
motor didn’t stop. I understood then that in order to go for-
ward I would have to lift my feet off the pedals, and if I did so
abruptly the car would shake like a person with St. Vitus
Dance. With that complete understanding of the principle of
motor locomotion, I drove down the mountainside toward
Calexico, some fifty miles away. It is hard to understand why
my vivid imagination and tendency toward scariness didn’t
provide me with gory scenes of bloody crashes on a risco de
Mexico. | can only think that my every sense was concentrated
on steering the bucking car.

When it became totally dark, I fumbled over knobs,
twisting and pulling until I succeeded in finding the lights.
The car slowed down as I centered on that search, and I forgot
to step on the pedals, and the motor gurgled, the car pitched
and the engine stopped. A bumbling sound from the back told
me that Dad had fallen off the seat (I had been expecting this
to happen for miles). I pulled the hand brake and carefully
considered my next move. It was useless to think of asking
Dad. The fall on the floor had failed to stir him, and I would




be unable to do so. No car was likely to pass us—I hadn’t seen
any motor vehicles since we passed the guard’s house early in
the day. We were headed downhill, so I reasoned that with
any luck we might coast right up to Calexico—or at least to
the guard. I waited until I formulated an approach to him
before releasing the brake. I would stop the car when we
reached the kiosk and put on my siddity air. I would speak to
him like the peasant he was. I would order him to start the car
and then tip him a quarter or even a dollar from Dad’s pocket
before driving on.

With my plans solidly made, I released the brake and we
began coasting down the slope. I also pumped the clutch and
the accelerator, hoping that the action would speed our
descent, and wonder of wonders the motor started again. The
Hudson went crazy on the hill. It was rebelling and would
have leaped over the side of the mountain, to all our destruc-
tion, in its attempt to unseat me had I relaxed control for a
single second. The challenge was exhilarating. It was me,
Marguerite, against the elemental opposition. As I twisted the
steering wheel and forced the accelerator to the floor I was
controlling Mexico, and might and aloneness and inexperi-
enced youth and Bailey Johnson, Sr., and death and insecurity,
and even gravity.

- After what seemed like one thousand and one nights of
challenge the mountain began to level off and we started
passing scattered hghts on either side of the road. No matter
what happened after that I had won. The car began to slow
down as if it had been tamed and was going to give up
without grace. I pumped even harder and we finally reached
the guard’s box. I pulled on the hand brake and came to a
stop. There would be no need for me to speak to the guard
since the motor was running, but I had to wait until he looked

into the car and gave me the signal to continue. He was busy
talking to people in a car facing the mountain I had just con-
quered. The light from his hut showed him bent from the
waist with his upper torso completely swallowed by the
mouth of the open window. I held the car in instant readiness
for the next lap of our journey. When the guard unfolded
himself and stood erect I was able to see he was not the same
man of the morning’s embarrassment. I was understandably
taken aback at the discovery and when he saluted sharply and
barked “Pasa” I released the brake, put both feet down and
lifted them a bit too sharply. The car outran my intention. It
leaped not only forward but left as well, and with a few angry
spurts propelled itself onto the side of the car just pulling off.
The crash of scraping metal was followed immediately by a
volley of Spanish hurled at me from all directions. Again,
strangely enough, fear was absent from my sensations. I won-
dered in this order: was I hurt, was anyone else hurt, would I
go to jail, what were the Mexicans saying, and finally, had
Dad awakened? I was able to answer the first and last concern
promptly. Buoyed by the adrenaline that had flooded my
brain as we careened down the mountainside, I had never felt
better, and my father’s snores cut through the cacophony of
protestations outside my window. I got out of the car,
intending to ask for the policias, but the guard beat me to the
punch. He said a few words, which were strung together like
beads, but one of them was policias. As the people in the other
car fumbled out, I tried to recover my control and said loudly
and too graciously, “Gracias, senor.” The family, some eight or
more people of every age and size, walked around me, talking
heatedly and sizing me up as if ] might have been a statue ina
city park and they were a flock of pigeons. One said “Joven,”
meaning I was young. I tried to see which one was so intelli-




gent. | would direct my conversation to him or her, but they
shifted positions so quickly it was impossible to make the
person out. Then another suggested “Borracho.” Well, cer-
tainly, I must have smelled like a tequila farm, since Dad had
been breathing out the liquor in noisy respirations and I had
kept the windows closed against the cold night air. It wasn’t
likely that I would explain that to these strangers even if I
could. Which I couldn’t. Someone got the idea to look into the
car, and a scream brought us all up short. People—they
seemed to be in the hundreds—crowded to the windows
and more screams erupted. I thought for a minute that some-
thing awful might have happened. Maybe at the time of the
crash ... I, too, pushed to the window to see, but then |
remembered the rhythmic snores, and coolly walked away.
The guard must have thought he had a major crime on his
hands. He made moves and sounds like “Watch her” or
“Don’t let her out of your sight.” The family came back, this
time not as close but more menacing, and when I was able to
sort out one coherent question, “Quién es?” I answered dryly
and with all the detachment I could summon, “Mi padre.”
Being a people of close family ties and weekly fiestas they sud-
denly understood the situation. I was a poor little girl thing
who was caring for my drunken father, who had stayed too
dong at the fair. Pobrecita.

The guard, the father and one or two small children
began the herculean job of waking Dad. I watched coolly as
the remaining people paraded, making figure eights around
me and their badly bruised automobile. The two men shook
and tugged and pulled while the children jumped up and
down on my father’s chest. I credit the children’s action for
the success of the effort. Bailey Johnson, Sr., woke up in
Spanish. “Qué tiene? Qué pasa? Qué quiere?” Anyone else

would have asked, “Where am I?” Obviously, this was a
common Mexican experience. When [ saw he was fairly lucid
IT went to the car, calmly pushed the people away, and said
from the haughty level of one who has successfully brought to
heel a marauding car and negotiated a sneaky mountain,
“Dad, there’s been an accident.” He recognized me by degrees
and became my pre-Mexican-fiesta father.

“An accident, huh? Er, who was at fault? You, Mar-
guerite? Errer was it you?”

It would have been futile to tell him of my mastering his
car and driving it nearly fifty miles. I didn’t expect or even
need, now, his approbation.

“Yes, Dad, I ran into a car.”

He still hadn’t sat up completely, so he couldn’t know
where we were. But from the floor where he rested, as if that
was the logical place to be, he said, “In the glove compart-
ment. The insurance papers. Get them and er give them to the
police, and then come back.”

The guard stuck his head in the other door before I could
form a scathing but polite response. He asked Dad to get out
of the car. Never ata loss, my father reached in the glove com-
partment, and took out the folded papers and the half bottle of
liquor he had left there earlier. He gave the guard one of his
pinch-backed laughs, and descended, by joints, from the car.
Once on the ground he towered over the angry people. He
took a quick reading of his location and the situation, and
then put his arm around the other driver’s shoulder. He
kindly, not in the least condescendingly, bent to speak to the
guard, and the three men walked into the hue. Within easy
minutes, laughter burst from the shack and the crisis was
over, but so was the enjoyment.

Dad shook hands with all the men, patted the children




and smiled winsomely at the women. Then, and without
looking at the damaged cars, he eased himself behind the
steering wheel. He called me to get in, and as if he had not
been helplessly drunk a half hour earlier, he drove unerringly
toward home. He said he didn’t know I could drive, and how
did I like his car? I was angry that he had recovered so quickly
and felt let down that he didn’t appreciate the greatness of my
achievement. So I answered yes to both the statement and the
question. Before we reached the border he rolled down the
window, and the fresh air, which was welcome, was uncom-
fortably cold. He told me to get his jacket from the back seat
and put it on. We drove into the city in a cold and private
silence.

