CHAPTER 5

wey



“THou shall not be dirty” and “Thou shall not be impudent”
were the two commandments of Grandmother Henderson
upon which hung our total salvation.

Each night in the bitterest winter we were forced to wash
faces, arms, necks, legs and feet before going to bed. She used
to add, with a smirk that unprofane people can’t control when
venturing into profanity, “and wash as far as possible, then
wash possible.”

We would go to the well and wash in the ice-cold, clear
water, grease our legs with the equally cold stiff Vaseline, then
tiptoe into the house. We wiped the dust from our toes and
settled down for schoolwork, cornbread, clabbered milk,
prayers and bed, always in that order. Momma was famous
for pulling the quilts off after we had fallen asleep to examine
our feet. If they weren’t clean enough for her, she took the
switch (she kept one behind the bedroom door for emergen-
cies) and woke up the offender with a few aptly placed
burning reminders.

The area around the well at night was dark and slick, and

boys told about how snakes love water, so that anyone who
had to draw water at night and then stand there alone and
wash knew that moccasins and rattlers, puff adders and boa
constrictors were winding their way to the well and would
arrive just as the person washing got soap in her eyes. But
Momma convinced us that not only was cleanliness next to
Godliness, dirtiness was the inventor of misery.

The impudent child was detested by God and a shame to
its parents and could bring destruction to its house and line.
All adults had to be addressed as Mister, Missus, Miss, Auntie,
Cousin, Unk, Uncle, Buhbah, Sister, Brother and a thousand
other appellations indicating familial relationship and the
lowliness of the addressor.

Everyone I knew respected these customary laws, except
for the powhitetrash children.

Some families of powhitetrash lived on Momma’s farm
land behind the school. Sometimes a gaggle of them came to
the Store, filling the whole room, chasing out the air and even
changing the well-known scents. The children crawled over
the shelves and into the potato and onion bins, twanging all
the time in their sharp voices like cigar-box guitars. They took
liberties in my Store that I would never dare. Since Momma
told us that the less you say to white-folks (or even powhite-
trash) the better, Bailey and I would stand, solemn, quiet, in
the displaced air. But if one of the playful apparitions got close
to us, I pinched it. Partly out of angry frustration and partly
because I didn’t believe in its flesh reality.

They called my uncle by his first name and ordered him
around the Store. He, to my crying shame, obeyed them in his
limping dip-straight-dip fashion.

My grandmother, too, followed their orders, except that




she didn’t seem to be servile because she anticipated their
needs.

“Here’s sugar, Miz Potter, and here’s baking powder. You
didn’t buy soda last month, you'll probably be needing some.”

Momma always directed her statements to the adults, but
sometimes, Oh painful sometimes, the grimy, snotty-nosed
girls would answer her.

“Naw, Annie ...”—to Momma? Who owned the land
they lived on? Who forgot more than they would ever learn?
If there was any justice in the world, God should strike them
dumb at once!—“Just give us some extry sody crackers, and
some more mackerel.”

At least they never looked in her face, or I never caught
them doing so. Nobody with a smidgen of training, not even
the worst roustabout, would look right in a grown person’s
face. It meant the person was trying to take the words out
before they were formed. The dirty little children didn’t do
that, but they threw their orders around the Store like lashes
from a cat-o’-nine-tails.

When I was around ten years old, those scruffy children
caused me the most painful and confusing experience I had
ever had with my grandmother.

One summer morning, after I had swept the dirt yard of

-leaves, spearmint-gum wrappers and Vienna-sausage labels, I

raked the yellow-red dirt, and made half-moons carefully, so
that the design stood out clearly and mask-like. I put the rake
behind the Store and came through the back of the house to
find Grandmother on the front porch in her big, wide white
apron. The apron was so stiff by virtue of the starch that it
could have stood alone. Momma was admiring the yard, so I
joined her. It truly looked like a flat redhead that had been
raked with a big-toothed comb. Momma didn’t say anything

but I knew she liked it. She looked over toward the school
principal’s house and to the right at Mr. McElroy’s. She was
hoping one of those community pillars would see the design
before the day’s business wiped it out. Then she looked
upward to the school. My head had swung with hers, so at just
about the same time we saw a troop of the powhitetrash kids
marching over the hill and down by the side of the school.

I looked to Momma for direction. She did an excellent job
of sagging from her waist down, but from the waist up she
seemed to be pulling for the top of the oak tree across the road.
Then she began to moan a hymn. Maybe not to moan, but the
tune was so slow and the meter so strange that she could have
been moaning. She didn’t look at me again, When the chil-
dren reached halfway down the hill, halfway to the Store, she
said without turning, “Sister, go on inside.”

I wanted to beg her, “Momma, don’t wait for them. Come
on inside with me. If they come in the Store, you go to the
bedroom and let me wait on them. They only frighten me if
you’re around. Alone I know how to handle them.” But of
course | couldn’t say anything, so I went in and stood behind
the screen door. -

Before the girls got to the porch I heard their laughter
crackling and popping like pine logs in a cooking stove. I sup-
pose my lifelong paranoia was born in those cold, molasses-
slow minutes. They came finally to stand on the ground in
front of Momma. At first they pretended seriousness. Then
one of them wrapped her right arm in the crook of her left,
pushed out her mouth and started to hum. I realized that she
was aping my grandmother. Another said, “Naw, Helen, you
ain’t standing like her. This here’s it.” Then she lifted her
chest, folded her arms and mocked that strange carriage that




was Annie Henderson. Another laughed, “Naw, you can’t do
it. Your mouth ain’t pooched out enough. It’s like this.”

I thought about the rifle behind the door, but I knew I’d
never be able to hold it straight, and the .410, our sawed-off
shotgun, which stayed loaded and was fired every New Year’s
night, was locked in the trunk and Uncle Willie had the key
on his chain. Through the fly-specked screen-door, I could see
that the arms of Momma’s apron jiggled from the vibrations
of her humming. But her knees seemed to have locked as if
they would never bend again.

She sang on. No louder than before, but no softer either.
No slower or faster.

The dirt of the girls’ cotton dresses continued on their
legs, feet, arms and faces to make them all of a piece. Their
greasy uncolored hair hung down, uncombed, with a grim
finality. I knelt to see them better, to remember them for all
time. The tears that had slipped down my dress left unsur-
prising dark spots, and made the front yard blurry and even
more unreal. The world had taken a deep breath and was
having doubts about continuing to revolve.

The girls had tired of mocking Momma and turned to
other means of agitation. One crossed her eyes, stuck her
thumbs in both sides of her mouth and said, “Look here,

“Annie.” Grandmother hummed on and the apron strings

trembled. I wanted to throw a handful of black pepper in
their faces, to throw lye on them, to scream that they were
dirty, scummy peckerwoods, but I knew I was as clearly
imprisoned behind the scene as the actors outside were con-
fined to their roles,

One of the smaller girls did a kind of puppet dance while
her fellow clowns laughed at her. But the tall one, who was
almost a woman, said something very quietly, which I

couldn’t hear. They all moved backward from the porch, still
watching Momma. For an awful second I thought they were
going to throw a rock at Momma, who seemed (except for the
apron strings) to have turned into stone herself. But the big
girl turned her back, bent down and put her hands flat on the
ground—she didn’t pick up anything. She simply shifted her
weight and did a hand stand.

Her dirty bare feet and long legs went straight for the sky.
Her dress fell down around her shoulders, and she had on no
drawers. The slick pubic hair made a brown triangle where
her legs came together. She hung in the vacuum of that lifeless
morning for only a few seconds, then wavered and tumbled.
The other girls clapped her on the back and slapped their
hands.

Momma changed her song to “Bread of Heaven, bread of
Heaven, feed me till | want no more.”

I found that I was praying too. How long could Momma
hold out? What new indignity would they think of to subject
her to? Would I be able to stay out of it? What would
Momma really like me to do?

Then they were moving out of the yard, on their way to
town. They bobbed their heads and shook their slack behinds
and turned, one at a time:

“Bye, Annie.”
“Bye, Annie.”
“Bye, Annie.”

Momma never turned her head or unfolded her arms, but
she stopped singing and said, “’Bye, Miz Helen, ’bye, Miz
Ruth, ’bye, Miz Eloise.”

I burst. A firecracker July-the-Fourth burst. How could
Momma call them Miz? The mean nasty things. Why
couldn’t she have come inside the sweet, cool store when we




saw them breasting the hill? What did she prove? And then if
they were dirty, mean and impudent, why did Momma have
to call them Miz?

She stood another whole song through and then opened
the screen door to look down on me crying in rage. She looked
until I looked up. Her face was a brown moon that shone on
me. She was beautiful. Something had happened out there,
which I couldn’t completely understand, but I could see that
she was happy. Then she bent down and touched me as
mothers of the church “lay hands on the sick and afflicted”
and I quieted.

“Go wash your face, Sister.” And she went behind the
candy counter and hummed, “Glory, glory, hallelujah, when I
lay my burden down.”

I threw the well water on my face and used the weekday
handkerchief to blow my nose. Whatever the contest had been
out front, I knew Momma had won.

I took the rake back to the front yard. The smudged foot-
prints were easy to erase. I worked for a long time on my new
design and laid the rake behind the wash pot. When I came
back in the Store, I took Momma’s hand and we both walked
outside to look at the pattern.

It was a large heart with lots of hearts growing smaller
inside, and piercing from the outside rim to the smallest heart
was an arrow. Momma said, “Sister, that’s right pretty.” Then
she turned back to the Store and resumed, “Glory, glory, hal-
lelujah, when I lay my burden down.”

