CHAPTER 14

Se



THE barrenness of Stamps was exactly what I wanted,
without will or consciousness. After St. Louis, with its noise
and activity, its trucks and buses, and loud family gatherings, I
welcomed the obscure lanes and lonely bungalows set back
deep in dirt yards.

The resignation of its inhabitants encouraged me to relax.
They showed me a contentment based on the belief that
nothing more was coming to them, although a great deal
more was due. Their decision to be satisfied with life’s
inequities was a lesson for me. Entering Stamps, I had the
feeling that I was stepping over the border lines of the map
and would fall, without fear, right off the end of the world.

Nothing more could happen, for in Stamps nothing
happened.

Into this cocoon I crept.

For an indeterminate time, nothing was demanded of me
or of Bailey. We were, after all, Mrs. Henderson’s California
grandchildren, and had been away on a glamorous trip way
up North to the fabulous St. Louis. Our father had come the

year before, driving a big, shiny automobile and speaking the
King’s English with a big city accent, so all we had to do was
lie quiet for months and rake in the profits of our adventures.

Farmers and maids, cooks and handymen, carpenters and
all the children in town, made regular pilgrimages to the
Store. “Just to see the travelers.”

They stood around like cutout cardboard figures and
asked, “Well, how is ic up North?”

“See any of them big buildings?”

“Ever ride in one of them elevators?”

“Was you scared?”

“Whitefolks any different, like they say?”

Bailey took it upon himself to answer every question, and
from a corner of his lively imagination wove a tapestry of
entertainment for them that I was sure was as foreign to him
as it was to me.

He, as usual, spoke precisely. “They have, in the North,
buildings so high that for months, in the winter, you can’t see
the top floors.”

“Tell the truth.”

“They’ve got watermelons twice the size of a cow’s head
and sweeter than syrup.” I distinctly remember his intent face
and the fascinated faces of his listeners. “And if you can count
the watermelon’s seeds, before it’s cut open, you can win five
zillion dollars and a new car.”

Momma, knowing Bailey, warned, “Now Ju, be careful
you don’t slip up on a not true.” (Nice people didn’t say “lie.”)

“Everybody wears new clothes and have inside toilets. If
you fall down in one of them, you get flushed away into the
Mississippi River. Some people have iceboxes, only the proper
name is Cold Spot or Frigidaire. The snow is so deep you can
get buried right outside your door and people won't find you




for a year. We made ice cream out of the snow.” That was the
only fact that I could have supported. During the winter, we
had collected a bowl of snow and poured Pet milk over it, and
sprinkled it with sugar and called it ice cream.

Momma beamed and Uncle Willie was proud when
Bailey regaled the customers with our exploits. We were
drawing cards for the Store and objects of the town’s adora-
tion. Our journey to magical places alone was a spot of color
on the town’s drab canvas, and our return made us even more
the most enviable of people.

High spots in Stamps were usually negative: droughts,
floods, lynchings and deaths.

Bailey played on the country folks’ need for diversion. Just
after our return he had taken to sarcasm, picked it up as one
might pick up a stone, and put it snufflike under his lip. The
double entendres, the two-pronged sentences, slid over his
tongue to dart rapier-like into anything that happened to be in
the way. Our customers, though, generally were so straight
thinking and speaking that they were never hurt by his
attacks. They didn’t comprehend them.

“Bailey Junior sound just like Big Bailey. Got a silver
tongue. Just like his daddy.”

“I hear tell they don’t pick cotton up there. How the
people live then?”

Bailey said that the corton up North was so tall, if ordinary
people tried to pick it they’d have to get up on ladders, so the
cotton farmers had their cotton picked by machines.

For a while I was the only recipient of Bailey’s kindness. It
was not that he pitied me but that he felt we were in the same
boat for different reasons, and that I could understand his
frustration just as he could countenance my withdrawal.

I never knew if Uncle Willie had been told about the

incident in St. Louis, but sometimes I caught him watching
me with a far-off look in his big eyes. Then he would quickly
send me on some errand that would take me out of his pres-
ence. When that happened I was both relieved and ashamed. I
certainly didn’t want a cripple’s sympathy (that would have
been a case of the blind leading the blind), nor did I want
Uncle Willie, whom I loved in my fashion, to think of me as
being sinful and dirty. If he thought so, at least I didn’t want
to know it.

Sounds came to me dully, as if people were speaking
through their handkerchiefs or with their hands over their
mouths. Colors weren’t true either, but rather a vague assort-
ment of shaded pastels that indicated not so much color as
faded familiarities. People’s names escaped me and I began to
worry over my sanity. After all, we had been away less than a
year, and customers whose accounts I had formerly remem-
bered without consulting the ledger were now complete
strangers,

People, except Momma and Uncle Willie, accepted my
unwillingness to talk as a natural outgrowth of a reluctant
return to the South. And an indication that I was pining for
the high times we had had in the big city. Then, too, I was
well known for being “tender-hearted.” Southern Negroes
used that term to mean sensitive and tended to look upon a
person with that affliction as being a little sick or in delicate
health. So I was not so much forgiven as I was understood.



