CHAPTER 7

Sex



Momma had married three times: Mr. Johnson, my grand-
father, who left her around the turn of the century with two
small sons to raise; Mr. Henderson, of whom I know nothing
at all (Momma never answered questions directly put to her
on any subject except religion); then finally Mr. Murphy. I saw
him a fleeting once. He came through Stamps on a Saturday
night, and Grandmother gave me the chore of making his
pallet on the floor. He was a stocky dark man who wore a
snap-brim hat like George Raft. The next morning he hung
around the Store until we returned from church. That
marked the first Sunday I knew Uncle Willie to miss services.
Bailey said he stayed home to keep Mr. Murphy from stealing
us blind. He left in the middle of the afternoon after one of
Momma’s extensive Sunday dinners. His hat pushed back off
his forehead, he walked down the road whistling. I watched
his thick back until he turned the bend by the big white
church,

People spoke of Momma as a good-looking woman and
some, who remembered her youth, said she used to be right




pretty. I saw only her power and strength. She was taller than
any woman in my personal world, and her hands were so
large they could span my head from ear to ear. Her voice was
soft only because she chose to keep it so. In church, when she
was called upon to sing, she seemed to pull out plugs from
behind her jaws and the huge, almost rough sound would
pour over the listeners and throb in the air.

Each Sunday, after she had taken her seat, the minister
would announce, “We will now be led in a hymn by Sister
Henderson.” And each Sunday she looked up with amaze-
ment at the preacher and asked silently, “Me?” After a second
of assuring herself that she indeed was being called upon, she
laid down her handbag and slowly folded her handkerchief.
This was placed neatly on top of the purse, then she leaned on
the bench in front and pushed herself to a standing position,
and then she opened her mouth and the song jumped out as if
it had only been waiting for the right time to make an appear-
ance. Week after week and year after year the performance
never changed, yet I don’t remember anyone’s ever remarking
on her sincerity or readiness to sing.

Momma intended to teach Bailey and me to use the paths
of life that she and her generation and all the Negroes gone
before had found, and found to be safe ones. She didn’t cotton

-to the idea that whitefolks could be talked to at all without

risking one’s life. And certainly they couldn’t be spoken to
insolently. In fact, even in their absence they could not be
spoken of too harshly unless we used the sobriquet “They.” If
she had been asked and had chosen to answer the question of
whether she was cowardly or not, she would have said that she
was a realist. Didn’t she stand up to “them” year after year?

Wasn't she the only Negro woman in Stamps referred to once
as Mrs.?

That incident became one of Stamps’ little legends. Some
years before Bailey and I arrived in town, a man was hunted
down for assaulting white womanhood. In trying to escape he
ran to the Store. Momma and Uncle Willie hid him behind
the chifforobe until night, gave him supplies for an overland
journey and sent him on his way. He was, however, appre-
hended, and in court when he was questioned as to his move-
ments on the day of the crime, he replied that after he heard
that he was being sought he took refuge in Mrs, Henderson’s
Store.

The judge asked that Mrs. Henderson be subpoenaed, and
when Momma arrived and said she was Mrs. Henderson, the
judge, the bailiff and other whites in the audience laughed.
The judge had really made a gaffe calling a Negro woman
Mrs., but then he was from Pine Bluff and couldn’t have been
expected to know that a woman who owned a store in that vil-
lage would also turn out to be colored. The whites tickled
their funny bones with the incident for a long time, and the
Negroes thought it proved the worth and majesty of my
grandmother.



