CHAPTER 19

Se



THE last inch of space was filled, yet people continued to
wedge themselves along the walls of the Store. Uncle Willie
had turned the radio up to its last notch so that youngsters on
the porch wouldn’t miss a word. Women sat on kitchen
chairs, dining-room chairs, stools and upturned wooden
boxes. Small children and babies perched on every lap avail-
able and men leaned on the shelves or on each other.

The apprehensive mood was shot through with shafts of
gaiety, as a black sky is streaked with lightning.

“T ain’t worried "bout this fight. Joe’s gonna whip that

cracker like it’s open season.”

“He gone whip him till that white boy call him Momma.”

At last the talking was finished and the string-along songs
about razor blades were over and the fight began.

“A quick jab to the head.” In the Store the crowd grunted.
“A left to the head and a right and another left.” One of the
listeners cackled like a hen and was quieted.

“They’re in a clench, Louis is trying to fight his way out.”

Some bitter comedian on the porch said, “That white man
don’t mind hugging that niggah now, I betcha.”

“The referee is moving in to break them up, but Louis
finally pushed the contender away and it’s an uppercut to the
chin. The contender is hanging on, now he’s backing away.
Louis catches him with a short left to the jaw.”

A tide of murmuring assent poured out the doors and into
the yard.

“Another left and another left. Louis is saving that mighty
right...” The mutter in the Store had grown into a baby roar
and it was pierced by the clang of a bell and the announcer’s
“That’s the bell for round three, ladies and gentlemen.”

As I pushed my way into the Store I wondered if the
announcer gave any thought to the fact that he was addressing
as “ladies and gentlemen” all the Negroes around the world
who sat sweating and praying, glued to their “master’s voice.”

There were only a few calls for R. C. Colas, Dr. Peppers,
and Hire’s root beer. The real festivities would begin after the
fight. Then even the old Christian ladies who taught their
children and tried themselves to practice turning the other
cheek would buy soft drinks, and if the Brown Bomber’s vic-
tory was a particularly bloody one they would order peanut
patties and Baby Ruths also.

Bailey and I lay the coins on top of the cash register. Uncle
Willie didn’t allow us to ring up sales during a fight. It was too
noisy and might shake up the atmosphere. When the gong
rang for the next round we pushed through the near-sacred
quiet to the herd of children outside.

“He’s got Louis against the ropes and now it’s a left to the
body and a right to the ribs. Another right to the body, it looks
like it was low ... Yes, ladies and gentlemen, the referee is
signaling but the contender keeps raining the blows on Louis.




It’s another to the body, and it looks like Louis is going
down.”

My race groaned, It was our people falling. It was another
lynching, yet another Black man hanging on a tree. One more
woman ambushed and raped. A Black boy whipped and
maimed. It was hounds on the trail of a man running through
slimy swamps. It was a white woman slapping her maid for
being forgetful.

The men in the Store stood away from the walls and at
attention, Women greedily clutched the babes on their laps
while on the porch the shufflings and smiles, flirtings and
pinching of a few minutes before were gone. This might be
the end of the world. If Joe lost we were back in slavery and
beyond help. It would all be true, the accusations that we were
lower types of human beings. Only a little higher than the
apes. True that we were stupid and ugly and lazy and dirty
and, unlucky and worst of all, that God Himself hated us and
ordained us to be hewers of wood and drawers of water, for-
ever and ever, world without end.

We didn’t breathe. We didn’t hope. We waited.

“He’s off the ropes, ladies and gentlemen. He’s moving
towards the center of the ring.” There was no time to be

_telieved, The worst might still happen.

“And now it looks like Joe is mad. He’s caught Carnera
with a left hook to the head and a right to the head. It’s a left jab
to the body and another left to the head. There’s a left cross and
aright to the head. The contender’s right eye is bleeding and he
can’t seem to keep his block up. Louis is penetrating every
block. The referee is moving in, but Louis sends a left to the
body and it’s the uppercut to the chin and the contender 1s drop-
ping. He’s on the canvas, ladies and gentlemen.”

Babies slid to the floor as women stood up and men leaned
toward the radio.

“Here’s the referee. He’s counting. One, two, three, four,
five, six, seven ... Is the contender trying to get up again?”

All the men in the store shouted, “NO.”

“eight, nine, ten.” There were a few sounds from the
audience, but they seemed to be holding themselves in against
tremendous pressure.

“The fight is all over, ladies and gentlemen. Let’s get the
microphone over to the referee ... Here he is. He’s got the
Brown Bomber’s hand, he’s holding it up... Here he is .. .”

Then the voice, husky and familiar, came to wash over
us—“The winnah, and still heavyweight champeen of the
world... Joe Louis.”

Champion of the world. A Black boy. Some Black
mother’s son. He was the strongest man in the world. People
drank Coca-Colas like ambrosia and ate candy bars like
Christmas. Some of the men went behind the Store and
poured white lightning in their soft-drink bottles, and a few
of the bigger boys followed them. Those who were not chased
away came back blowing their breath in front of themselves
like proud smokers. :

It would take an hour or more before the people would
leave the Store and head for home. Those who lived too far
had made arrangements to stay in town. It wouldn’t do for a
Black man and his family to be caught on a lonely country
road on a night when Joe Louis had proved that we were the
strongest people in the world.



