CHAPTER 35

Sey



THE Well of Loneliness was my introduction to lesbianism and
what I thought of as pornography. For months the book was
both a treat and a threat. It allowed me to see a little of the
mysterious world of the pervert. It stimulated my libido and I
told myself that it was educational because it informed me of
the difficulties in the secret world of the pervert. I was certain
that I didn’t know any perverts. Of course I ruled out the jolly
sissies who sometimes stayed at our house and cooked whop-
ping eight-course dinners while the perspiration made paths
down their made-up faces. Since everyone accepted them, and
more particularly since they accepted themselves, I knew that
their laughter was real and that their lives were cheerful
comedies, interrupted only by costume changes and fresh-
ening of make-up.

But true freaks, the “women lovers,” captured yet strained
my imagination. They were, according to the book, disowned
by their families, snubbed by their friends and ostracized from

every society. This bitter punishment was inflicted upon them






because of a physical condition over which they had no
control.

After my third reading of The Well of Loneliness | became a
bleeding heart for the downtrodden misunderstood lesbians. I
thought “lesbian” was synonymous with hermaphrodite, and
when I wasn’t actively aching over their pitiful state, I was
wondering how they managed simpler body functions. Did
they have a choice of organs to use, and if so, did they alternate
or play favorite? Or I tried to imagine how two hermaphro-
dites made love, and the more I pondered the more confused I
became. It seemed that having two of everything other people
had, and four where ordinary people just had two, would com-
plicate matters to the point of giving up the idea of making love
at all.

It was during this reflective time that I noticed how heavy
my own voice had become. It droned and drummed two or
three whole tones lower than my schoolmates’ voices. My
hands and feet were also far from being feminine and dainty.
In front of the mirror 1 detachedly examined my body. For a
sixteen-year-old my breasts were sadly undeveloped. They
could only be called skin swellings, even by the kindest critic.
The line from my rib cage to my knees fell straight without
even a ridge to disturb its direction. Younger girls than I
boasted of having to shave under their arms, but my armpits
were as smooth as my face. There was also a mysterious
growth developing on my body that defied explanation. It
looked totally useless.

Then the question began to live under my blankets:
How did lesbianism begin? What were the symptoms? The
public library gave information on the finished lesbian-—and
that woefully sketchy—but on the growth of a lesbian, there
was nothing. I did discover that the difference between

hermaphrodites and lesbians was that hermaphrodites were
“born that way.” It was impossible to determine whether les-
bians budded gradually, or burst into being with a suddenness
that dismayed them as much as it repelled society.

I had gnawed into the unsatisfying books and into my
own unstocked mind without finding a morsel of peace or
understanding. And meantime, my voice refused to stay up in
the higher registers where I consciously pitched it, and I had
to buy my shoes in the “old lady’s comfort” section of the shoe
stores.

I asked Mother.

Daddy Clidell was at the club one evening, so I sat down
on the side of Mother’s bed. As usual she woke completely and
at once. (There is never any yawning or stretching with
Vivian Baxter. She’s either awake or asleep.)

“Mother, I’ve go to talk to you...” It was going to kill me
to have to ask her, for in the asking wouldn’t it be possible that
suspicion would fall on my own normality? I knew her well
enough to know that if I committed almost any crime and told
her the truth about it she not only wouldn’t disown me but
would give me her protection. But just suppose I was devel-
oping into a lesbian, how would she react? And then there
was Bailey to worry about too.

“Ask me, and pass me a cigarette.” Her calmness didn’t
fool me for a minute. She used to say that her secret to life was
that she “hoped for the best, was prepared for the worst, so
anything in between didn’t come as a surprise.” That was all
well and good for most things but if her only daughter was
developing intoa...

She moved over and patted the bed, “Come on, baby, get
in the bed. You'll freeze before you get your question out.”

It was better to remain where I was for the time being.




“Mother ... my pocketbook . . .”

“Ritie, do you mean your vagina? Don’t use those Southern
terms. There’s nothing wrong with the word ‘vagina.’ It’s a
clinical description. Now, what's wrong with it?”

The smoke collected under the bed lamp, then floated out
to be free in the room. I was deathly sorry that I had begun to
ask her anything.

“Well? ... Well? Have you got crabs?”

Since I didn’t know what they were, that puzzled me. I
thought I might have them and it wouldn't go well for my
side if T said I didn’t. On the other hand, I just might not have
them, and suppose I lied and said I did?

“T don’t know, Mother.”

“Do you itch? Does your vagina itch?” She leaned on one
elbow and jabbed out her cigarette.

“No, Mother.”

“Then you don’t have crabs. If you had them, you'd tell
the world.”

I wasn’t sorry or glad not to have them, but made a mental
note to look up “crabs” in the library on my next trip.

She looked at me closely, and only a person who knew her
face well could have perceived the muscles relaxing and inter-
preted this as an indication of concern.

“You don’t have a venereal disease, do your”

The question wasn’t asked seriously, but knowing Mother
I was shocked at the idea. “Why, Mother, of course not. That’s
a terrible question.” I was ready to go back to my room and
wrestle alone with my worries.

“Sit down, Ritie. Pass me another cigarette.” For a second
it looked as if she was thinking about laughing. That would
really do it. If she laughed, [’'d never tell her anything

else. Her laughter would make it easier to accept my social

isolation and human freakishness. But she wasn’t even
smiling. Just slowly pulling in the smoke and holding it in
puffed cheeks before blowing it out.

“Mother, something is growing on my vagina.”

There, it was out. I’d soon know whether I was to be her
ex-daughter or if she’d put me in a hospital for an operation.

“Where on your vagina, Marguerite?”

Uh-huh. It was bad all right. Not “Ritie” or “Maya” or
“Baby.” “Marguerite.”

“On both sides. Inside.” I couldn’t add that they were
fleshy skin flaps that had been growing for months down
there. She’d have to pull that out of me.

“Ritie, go get me that big Weéster’s and then bring me a
bottle of beer.”

Suddenly, it wasn’t all that serious. I was “Ritie” again,
and she just asked for beer. If it had been as awful as I antici-
pated, she’d have ordered Scotch and water. I took her the
huge dictionary that she had bought as a birthday gift for
Daddy Clidell and laid it on the bed. The weight forced a side
of the mattress down and Mother twisted her bed lamp to
beam down on the book. .

When I returned from the kitchen and poured her beer, as
she had taught Bailey and me beer should be poured, she
patted the bed.

“Sit down, baby. Read this.” Her fingers guided my eyes
to vutva. I began to read. She said, “Read it out loud.”

It was all very clear and normal-sounding. She drank the
beer as I read, and when I had finished she explained it in
every-day terms. My relief melted the fears and they liquidly
stole down my face.

Mother shot up and put her arms around me.






“There’s nothing to worry about, baby. It happens to
every woman. It’s just human nature.”

Tt was all right then to unburden my heavy, heavy heart. I
cried into the crook of my arm. “I thought maybe I was
turning into a lesbian.”

Her patting of my shoulder slowed to a still and she
leaned away from me.

“A lesbian? Where the hell did you get that idea?”

“Those things growing on my ... vagina, and my voice is
too deep and my feet are big, and I have no hips or breasts or
anything. And my legs are so skinny.”

Then she did laugh. I knew immediately that she wasn’t
laughing at me. Or rather that she was laughing at me, but it
was something about me that pleased her. The laugh choked a
little on the smoke in its way, but finally broke through
cleanly. I had to give a small laugh too, although I wasn’t
tickled at all. But it’s mean to watch someone enjoy something
and now show your understanding of their enjoyment.

When she finished with the laughter, she laid it down a
peal at a time and turned to me, wiping her eyes.

“I made arrangements, a long time ago, to have a boy and
a girl. Bailey is my boy and you are my girl. The Man upstairs,
He don’t make mistakes. He gave you to me to be my girl and

‘that’s just what you are. Now, go wash your face, have a glass

of milk and go back to bed.”

I did as she said but I soon discovered my new assurance
wasn’t large enough to fill the gap left by my old uneasiness. It
rattled around in my mind like a dime in a tin cup. I hoarded
it preciously, but less than two weeks later it became totally
worthless.

A classmate of mine, whose mother had rooms for herself
and her daughter in a ladies’ residence, had stayed out beyond

closing time. She telephoned me to ask if she could sleep at my
house. Mother gave her permission, providing my friend tele-
phoned her mother from our house.

When she arrived, I got out of bed and we went to the
upstairs kitchen to make hot chocolate. In my room we shared
mean gossip about our friends, giggled over boys and whined
about school and the tedium of life. The unusualness of
having someone sleep in my bed (I’d never slept with anyone
except my grandmothers) and the frivolous laughter in the
middle of the night made me forget simple courtesies. My
friend had to remind me that she had nothing to sleep in. I
gave her one of my gowns, and without curiosity or interest I
watched her pull off her clothes. At none of the early stages of
undressing was I in the least conscious of her body. And then
suddenly, for the briefest eye span, I saw her breasts. I was
stunned.

They were shaped like light-brown falsies in the five-and-
ten-cent store, but they were real. They made all the nude
paintings I had seen in museums come to life. In a word they
were beautiful. A universe divided what she had from what I
had. She was a woman.

My gown was too snug for her and much too long, and
when she wanted to laugh at her ridiculous image I found that
humor had left me without a promise to return.

Had I been older I might have thought that I was moved
by both an esthetic sense of beauty and the pure emotion of
envy. But those possibilities did not occur to me when I
needed them. All I knew was that I had been moved by
looking at a woman’s breasts. So all the calm and casual words
of Mother’s explanation a few weeks earlier and the clinical
terms of Noah Webster did not alter the fact that in a funda-
mental way there was something queer about me.








T somersaulted deeper into my snuggery of misery. After a
through self-examination, in the light of all I had read and
heard about dykes and bulldaggers, I reasoned that I had none
of the obvious traits—I didn’t wear trousers, or have big
shoulders or go in for sports, or walk like a man or even want
to touch a woman, I wanted to be a woman, but that seemed
to me to be a world to which I was to be eternally refused
entrance.

What I needed was a boyfriend. A boyfriend would clarify
my position to the world and, even more important, to myself.
A boyfriend’s acceptance of me would guide me into that
strange and exotic land of frills and femininity.

Among my associates, there were no takers. Understand-
ably the boys of my age and social group were captivated by
the yellow- or light-brown-skinned girls, with hairy legs and
smooth little lips, and whose hair “hung down like horses’
manes.” And even those sought-after girls were asked to “give
it up or tell where it is.” They were reminded in a popular
song of the times, “If you can’t smile and say yes, please don’t
cry and say no.” If the pretties were expected to make the
supreme sacrifice in order to “belong,” what could the un-
attractive female do? She who had been skimming along on
life’s turning but never-changing periphery had to be ready to
be a “buddy” by day and maybe by night. She was called upon
to be generous only if the pretty girls were unavailable.

I believe most plain girls are virtuous because of the
scarcity of opportunity to be otherwise. They shield them-
selves with an aura of unavailableness (for which after a time
they begin to take credit) largely as a defense tactic.

In my particular case, I could not hide behind the curtain

of voluntary goodness. I was being crushed by two unrelenting

forces: the uneasy suspicion that I might not be a normal
female and my newly awakening sexual appetite.

I decided to take matters into my own hands. (An unfor-
tunate but apt phrase.)

Up the hill from our house, and on the same side of the
street, lived two handsome brothers. They were easily the
most eligible young men in the neighborhood. If I was going
to venture into sex, I saw no reason why I shouldn’t make my
experiment with the best of the lot. I didn’t really expect to
capture either brother on a permanent basis, but I thought if I
could hook one temporarily I might be able to work the rela-
tionship into something more lasting.

I planned a chart for seduction with surprise as my
opening ploy. One evening as I walked up the hill suffering
from youth’s vague malaise (there was simply nothing to do),
the brother I had chosen came walking directly into my trap.

“Hello, Marguerite.” He nearly passed me.

I put the plan into action. “Hey.” I plunged, “Would you
like to have a sexual intercourse with me?” Things were going
according to the chart. His mouth hung open like a garden
gate. I had the advantage and so I pressed it.

“Take me somewhere.”

His response lacked dignity, but in fairness to him I admit
that I had left him little chance to be suave.

He asked, “You mean, you’re going to give me some
tim?”

I assured him that that was exactly what I was about to
give him. Even as the scene was being enacted I realized the
imbalance in his values. He thought I was giving him some-
thing, and the fact of the matter was that it was my intention
to take something from him. His good looks and popularity




had made him so inordinately conceited that they blinded him
to that possibility.

We went to a furnished room occupied by one of his
friends, who understood the situation immediately and got his
coat and left us alone. The seductee quickly turned off the
lights. I would have preferred them left on, but didn’t want to
appear more aggressive than I had been already. If that was
possible.

I was excited rather than nervous, and hopeful instead of
frightened. I had not considered how physical an act of seduc-
tion would be. I had anticipated long soulful tongued kisses
and gentle caresses. But there was no romance in the knee
which forced my legs, nor in the rub of hairy skin on my chest.

Unredeemed by shared tenderness, the time was spent in
laborious gropings, pullings, yankings and jerkings.

Not one word was spoken.

My partner showed that our experience had reached its
climax by getting up abruptly, and my main concern was how
to get home quickly. He may have sensed that he had been
used, or his disinterest may have been an indication that I was
less than gratifying. Neither possibility bothered me.

Outside on the street we left each other with little more
than “Okay, see you around,”

Thanks to Mr. Freeman nine years before, I had had no
pain of entry to endure, and because of the absence of
romantic involvement neither of us felt much had happened.

At home I reviewed the failure and tried to evaluate my
new position. I had had a man. I had been had. I not only
didn’t enjoy it, but my normalcy was still a question.

What happened to the moonlight-on-the-prairie feeling?
Was there something so wrong with me that I couldn’t share a
sensation that made poets gush out rhyme after rhyme, that

made Richard Arlen brave the Arctic wastes and Veronica
Lake betray the entire free world?

There seems to be no explanation for my private infirmity,
but being a product (is “victim” a better word?) of the
Southern Negro upbringing, I decided that I “would under-
stand it all better by-and-by.” I went to sleep.

Three weeks later, having thought very little of the
strange and strangely empty night, I found myself pregnant.



