CHAPTER 34



LATER, my room had all the cheeriness of a dungeon and the
appeal of a tomb. It was going to be impossible to stay there,
but leaving held no attraction for me, either. Running away
from home would be anticlimactic after Mexico, and a dull
story after my month in the car lot. But the need for change
bulldozed a road down the center of my mind.

I had it. The answer came to me with the suddenness of a
collision. | would go to work. Mother wouldn’t be difficult to
convince; after all, in school I was a year ahead of my grade
and Mother was a firm believer in self-sufficiency. In fact,
she'd be pleased to think that I had that much gumption, that
much of her in my character. (She liked to speak of herself as
the original “do-it-yourself girl.”)

Once I had settled on getting a job, all that remained was
to decide which kind of job I was most fitted for. My intellec-
tual pride had kept me from selecting typing, shorthand or
filing as subjects in school, so office work was ruled out. War
plants and shipyards demanded birth certificates, and mine
would reveal me to be fifteen, and ineligible for work. So the

well-paying defense jobs were also out. Women had replaced
men on the streetcars as conductors and motormen, and the
thought of sailing up and down the hills of San Francisco in a
dark-blue uniform, with a money changer at my belt, caught
my fancy.

Mother was as easy as I had anticipated. The world was
moving so fast, so much money was being made, so many
people were dying in Guam, and Germany, that hordes of
strangers became good friends overnight. Life was cheap and
death entirely free. How could she have the time to think
about my academic career?

To her question of what I planned to do, I replied that I
would get a job on the streetcars. She rejected the proposal
with: “They don’t accept colored people on the streetcars.”

I would like to claim an immediate fury which was fol-
lowed by the noble determination to break the restricting
tradition. But the truth is, my first reaction was one of disap-
pointment. I’d pictured myself, dressed in a neat blue serge
suit, my money changer swinging jauntily at my waist, and a
cheery smile for the passengers which would make their own
work day brighter,

From disappointment, I gradually ascended the emotional
ladder to haughty indignation, and finally to that state of stub-
bornness where the mind is locked like the jaws of an enraged
bulldog.

I would go to work on the streetcars and wear a blue serge
suit. Mother gave me her support with one of her usual terse
asides, “That’s what you want to do? Then nothing beats a
trial but a failure. Give it everything you've got. I’ve told you
many times, ‘Can’t do is like Don’t Care.’ Neither of them
have a home.”

Translated, that meant there was nothing a person can’t






do, and there should be nothing a human being didn’t care

about. It was the most positive encouragement I could have

hoped for.

IN the offices of the Market Street Railway Company, the
receptionist seemed as surprised to see me there as I was sur-
prised to find the interior dingy and the décor drab. Somehow
I had expected waxed surfaces and carpeted floors. If I had
met no resistance, I might have decided against working for
such a poor-mouth-looking concern. As it was, I explained
that I had come to see about a job. She asked, was I sent by an
agency, and when I replied that I was not, she told me they
were only accepting applicants from agencies.

The classified pages of the morning papers had listed
advertisements for motorettes and conductorettes and I
reminded her of that. She gave me a face full of astonishment
that my suspicious nature would not accept.

“I am applying for the job listed in this morning’s
Chronicle and I'd like to be presented to your personnel man-
ager.” While I spoke in supercilious accents, and looked at the
room as if I had an oil well in my own backyard, my armpits
were being pricked by millions of hot pointed needles. She
saw her escape and dived into it.

“He’s out. He’s out for the day. You might call tomorrow
and if he’s in, I’m sure you can see him.” Then she swiveled
her chair around on its rusty screws and with that I was sup-
posed to be dismissed.

“May I ask his name?”
She half turned, acting surprised to find me still there.
“His name? Whose name?”

ae »
Your personnel manager.

We were firmly joined in the hypocrisy to play out the
scene.

“The personnel manager? Oh, he’s Mr. Cooper, but I’m
nor sure you'll find him here tomorrow. He’s ... Oh, but you
can try.”

“Thank you.”

“You're welcome.”

And I was out of the musty room and into the even
mustier lobby. In the street I saw the receptionist and myself
going faithfully through paces that were stale with familiarity,
although I had never encountered that kind of situation
before and, probably, neither had she. We were like actors
who, knowing the play by heart, were still able to cry afresh
over the old tragedies and laugh spontaneously at the comic
situations.

The miserable little encounter had nothing to do with me,
the me of me, any more than it had to do with that silly clerk.
The incident was a recurring dream, concocted years before by
stupid whites and it eternally came back to haunt us all. The
secretary and I were like Hamlet and Laertes in the final scene,
where, because of harm done by one ancestor to another, we
were bound to duel to the death. Also because the play must
end somewhere.

I went further than forgiving the clerk, I accepted her as a
fellow victim of the same puppeteer.

On the streetcar, I put my fare into the box and the con-
ductorette looked at me with the usual hard eyes of white con-
tempt. “Move into the car, please move on in the car.” She
patted her money changer.

Her Southern nasal accent sliced my meditation and I
looked deep into my thoughts. All lies, all comfortable lies.
The receptionist was not innocent and neither was I. The




whole charade we had played out in that crummy waiting
room had directly to do with me, Black, and her, white.

I wouldn’t move into the streetcar but stood on the ledge
over the conductor, glaring. My mind shouted so energetically
that the announcement made my veins stand out, and my
mouth tighten into a prune.

IT WOULD HAVE THE JOB.I WOULD BE A CON-
DUCTORETTE AND SLING A FULL MONEY
CHANGER FROM MY BELT. I WOULD.

The next three weeks were a honeycomb of determination
with apertures for the days to go in and out. The Negro orga-
nizations to whom I appealed for support bounced me back
and forth like a shuttlecock on a badminton court. Why did I
insist on that particular job? Openings were going begging
that paid nearly twice the money. The minor officials with
whom I was able to win an audience thought me mad. Pos-
sibly I was.

Downtown San Francisco became alien and cold, and the
streets I had loved in a personal familiarity were unknown
lanes that twisted with malicious intent. Old buildings, whose
gray rococo fagades housed my memories of the Forty-Niners,
and Diamond Lil, Robert Service, Sutter and Jack London,
were then imposing structures viciously joined to keep me
out. My trips to the streetcar office were of the frequency of a
person on salary, The struggle expanded. I was no longer in
conflict only with the Market Street Railway but with the
marble lobby of the building which housed its offices, and ele-
vators and their operators.

During this period of strain Mother and I began our first
steps on the long path toward mutual adult admiration. She
never asked for reports and I didn’t offer any details. But
every morning she made breakfast, gave me carfare and lunch

money, as if I were going to work. She comprehended the per-
versity of life, that in the struggle lies the joy. That I was no
glory seeker was obvious to her, and that I had to exhaust
every possibility before giving in was also clear.

On my way out of the house one morning she said, “Life is
going to give you just what you put in it. Put your whole heart
in everything you do, and pray, then you can wait.” Another
time she reminded me that “God helps those who help them-
selves.” She had a store of aphorisms which she dished out as
the occasion demanded. Strangely, as bored as I was with
clichés, her inflection gave them something new, and set me
thinking for a little while at least. Later when asked how I got
my job, I was never able to say exactly. I only knew that one
day, which was tiresomely like all the others before it, I sat in
the Railway office, ostensibly waiting to be interviewed. The
receptionist called me to her desk and shuffled a bundle of
papers to me. They were job application forms. She said they
had to be filled in triplicate. I had little time to wonder if I had
won or not, for the standard questions reminded me of the
necessity for dexterous lying. How old was I? List my pre-
vious jobs, starting from the last held and go backward to the
first. How much money did I earn, and why did I leave the
position? Give two references (not relatives).

Sitting at a side table my mind and I wove a cat’s ladder of
near truths and total lies. ] kept my face blank (an old art) and
wrote quickly the fable of Marguerite Johnson, aged nineteen,
former companion and driver for Mrs. Annie Henderson (a
White Lady) in Stamps, Arkansas.

I was given blood tests, aptitude tests, physical coordina-
tion tests, and Rorschachs, then on a blissful day I was hired as
the first Negro on the San Francisco streetcars.

Mother gave me the money to have my blue serge suit tai-




lored, and I learned to fill out work cards, operate the money
changer and punch transfers. The time crowded together and
at an End of Days I was swinging on the back of the rackety
trolley, smiling sweetly and persuading my charges to “step
forward in the car, please.”

For one whole semester the streetcars and I shimmied up
and scooted down the sheer hills of San Francisco. I lost some
of my need for the Black ghetto’s shielding-sponge quality, as
I clanged and cleared my way down Market Street, with its
honky-tonk homes for homeless sailors, past the quiet retreat
of Golden Gate Park and along closed undwelled-in-looking
dwellings of the Sunset District.

My work shifts were split so haphazardly that it was casy
to believe that my superiors had chosen them maliciously.
Upon mentioning my suspicions to Mother, she said, “Don’t
worry about it. You ask for what you want, and you pay for
what you get. And I’m going to show you that it ain’t no
trouble when you pack double.”

She stayed awake to drive me out to the car barn at four
thirty in the mornings, or to pick me up when I was relieved
just before dawn. Her awareness of life’s perils convinced her
that while I would be safe on the public conveyances, she
“wasn't about to trust a taxi driver with her baby.”

When the spring classes began, I resumed my commit-
ment with formal education. I was so much wiser and older,
so much more independent, with a bank account and clothes
that I had bought for myself, that I was sure that I had learned
and earned the magic formula which would make me a part
of the gay life my contemporaries led.

Not a bit of it. Within weeks, I realized that my school-
mates and I were on paths moving diametrically away from
each other. They were concerned and excited over the

approaching football games, but I had in my immediate past
raced a car down a dark and foreign Mexican mountain. They
concentrated great interest on who was worthy of being stu-
dent body president, and when the metal bands would be
removed from their teeth, while I remembered sleeping for a
month in a wrecked automobile and conducting a streetcar in
the uneven hours of the morning.

Without willing it, I had gone from being ignorant of
being ignorant to being aware of being aware. And the worst
part of my awareness was that I didn’t know what I was
aware of. I knew I knew very little, but I was certain that the
things I had yet to learn wouldn’t be taught to me at George
Washington High School.

I began to cut classes, to walk in Golden Gate Park or
wander along the shiny counter of the Emporium Depart-
ment store. When Mother discovered that I was playing
truant, she told me that if I didn’t want to go to school one
day, if there were no tests being held, and if my school work
was up to standard, all I had to do was tell her and I could stay
home. She said that she didn’t want some white woman
calling her up to tell her something about her child that she
didn’t know. And she didn’t want to be put in the position of
lying to a white woman because I wasn’t woman enough to
speak up. That put an end to my truancy, but nothing
appeared to lighten the long gloomy day that going to school
became.

To be left alone on the tightrope of youthful unknowing is
to experience the excruciating beauty of full freedom and the
threat of eternal indecision. Few, if any, survive their teens.
Most surrender to the vague but murderous pressure of adult
conformity. It becomes easier to die and avoid conflicts than to
maintain a constant battle with the superior forces of maturity.






Until recently each generation found it more expedient to
plead guilty to the charge of being young and ignorant, easier
to take the punishment meted out by the older generation
(which had itself confessed to the same crime short years
before). The command to grow up at once was more bearable
than.the faceless horror of wavering purpose, which was
youth.

The bright hours when the young rebelled against the
descending sun had to give way to twenty-four-hour periods
called “days” that were named as well as numbered.

The Black female is assaulted in her tender years by all
those common forces of nature at the same time that she is
caught in the tripartite crossfire of masculine prejudice, white
illogical hate and Black lack of power.

The fact that the adult American Negro female emerges a
formidable character is often met with amazement, distaste
and even belligerence. It is seldom accepted as an inevitable
outcome of the struggle won by survivors and deserves respect
if not enthusiastic acceptance.

