CHAPTER 3

Sey



Weicuine the half-pounds of flour, excluding the scoop, and
depositing them dust-free into the thin paper sacks held a
simple kind of adventure for me. I developed an eye for mea-
suring how full a silver-looking ladle of flour, mash, meal,
sugar or corn had to be to push the scale indicator over to eight
ounces or one pound. When I was absolutely accurate our
appreciative customers used to admire: “Sister Henderson
sure got some smart grandchildrens.” If] was off in the Store’s
favor, the eagle-eyed women would say, “Put some more in
that sack, child. Don’t you try to make your profit offa me.”

Then I would quietly but persistently punish myself. For
every bad judgment, the fine was no silver-wrapped Kisses,
the sweet chocolate drops that I loved more than anything in
the world, except Bailey. And maybe canned pineapples. My
obsession with pineapples nearly drove me mad. I dreamt of
the days when I would be grown and able to buy a whole
carton for myself alone.

Although the syrupy golden rings sat in their exotic cans
on our shelves year round, we only tasted them during

Christmas. Momma used the juice to make almost-black fruit
cakes. Then she lined heavy soot-encrusted iron skillets with
the pineapple rings for rich upside-down cakes. Bailey and I
received one slice each, and I carried mine around for hours,
shredding off the fruit until nothing was left except the per-
fume on my fingers. I'd like to think that my desire for
pineapples was so sacred that I wouldn’t allow myself to steal
a can (which was possible) and eat it alone out in the garden,
bur I’m certain that I must have weighed the possibility of the
scent exposing me and didn’t have the nerve to attempt it.

Until I was thirteen and left Arkansas for good, the Store
was my favorite place to be. Alone and empty in the mornings,
it looked like an unopened present from a stranger. Opening
the front doors was pulling the ribbon off the unexpected gift.
The light would come in softly (we faced north), easing itself
over the shelves of mackerel, salmon, tobacco, thread. It fell
flat on the big vat of lard and by noontime during the summer
the grease had softened to a thick soup. Whenever I walked
into the Store in the afternoon, I sensed that it was tired. I
alone could hear the slow pulse of its job half done. But just
before bedtime, after numerous people had walked in and out,
had argued over their bills, or joked about their neighbors, or
just dropped in “to give Sister Henderson a ‘Hi y’all,’” the
promise of magic mornings returned to the Store and spread
itself over the family in washed life waves.

Momma opened boxes of crispy crackers and we sat
around the meat block at the rear of the Store. I sliced onions,
and Bailey opened two or even three cans of sardines and
allowed their juice of oil and fishing boats to ooze down and
around the sides. That was supper. In the evening, when we
were alone like that, Uncle Willie didn’t stutter or shake or
give any indication that he had an “affliction.” It seemed that




the peace of a day’s ending was an assurance that the covenant
God made with children, Negroes and the crippled was still in
effect.

THROWING scoops of corn to the chickens and mixing sour dry
mash with leftover food and oily dish water for the hogs were
among our evening chores. Bailey and I sloshed down twilight
trails to the pig pens, and standing on the first fence rungs we
poured down the unappealing concoctions to our grateful
hogs. They mashed their tender pink snouts down into the
slop, and rooted and grunted their satisfaction. We always
grunted a reply only half in jest. We were also grateful that we
had concluded the dirtiest of chores and had only gotten the
evil-smelling swill on our shoes, stockings, feet and hands.

Late one day, as we were attending to the pigs, I heard a
horse in the front yard (it really should have been called a
driveway, except that there was nothing to drive into it), and
ran to find out who had come riding up on a Thursday eve-
ning when even Mr. Steward, the quiet, bitter man who
owned a riding horse, would be resting by his warm fire until
the morning called him out to turn over his field.

The used-to-be sheriff sat rakishly astraddle his horse. His

nonchalance was meant to convey his authority and power

over even dumb animals. How much more capable he would
be with Negroes. It went without saying.

His twang jogged in the brittle air. From the side of the
Store, Bailey and I heard him say to Momma, “Annie, tell
Willie he better lay low tonight. A crazy nigger messed with a
white lady today. Some of the boys’ll be coming over here

later.” Even after the slow drag of years, I remember the sense

of fear which filled my mouth with hot, dry air, and made my
body light.

The “boys”? Those cement faces and eyes of hate chat
burned the clothes off you if they happened to see you
lounging on the main street downtown on Saturday. Boys? It
seemed that youth had never happened to them. Boys? No
rather men who were covered with graves’ dust and age

without beauty or learning. The ugliness and rottenness of old
abominations.

’

If on Judgment Day I were summoned by St. Peter to give
testimony to the used-to-be sheriff's act of kindness, I would
be unable to say anything in his behalf. His confidence that my
uncle and every other Black man who heard of the Klan’s
coming ride would scurry under their houses to hide in
chicken droppings was too humiliating to hear. Without
waiting for Momma’s thanks, he rode out of the yard, sure
that things were as they should be and that he was a gentle
squire, saving those deserving serfs from the laws of the land,
which he condoned.

Immediately, while his horse’s hoofs were still loudly
thudding the ground, Momma blew out the coal-oil lamps.
She had a quiet, hard talk with Uncle Willie and called Bailey
and me into the Store.

We were told to take the potatoes and onions out of their
bins and knock out the dividing walls that kept them apart.
Then with a tedious and fearful slowness Uncle Willie gave
me his rubber-tipped cane and bent down to get into the now-
enlarged empty bin. It took forever before he lay down flat,
and then we covered him with potatoes and onions, layer
upon layer, like a casserole. Grandmother knelt praying in the
darkened Store.

It was fortunate that the “boys” didn’t ride into our yard




that evening and insist that Momma open the Store. They
would have surely found Uncle Willie and just as surely
lynched him. He moaned the whole night through as if he
had, in fact, been guilty of some heinous crime. The heavy
sounds pushed their way up out of the blanket of vegetables
and I pictured his mouth pulling down on the right side and
his saliva flowing into the eyes of new potatoes and waiting
there like dew drops for the warmth of morning.

