CHAPTER 28
a



ALTHOUGH my grades were very good (I had been put up
two semesters on my arrival from Stamps), I found myself
unable to settle down in the high school. It was an institution
for girls near my house, and the young ladies were faster,
brasher, meaner and more prejudiced than any I had met at
Lafayette County Training School. Many of the Negro girls
were, like me, straight from the South, but they had known or
claimed to have known the bright lights of Big D (Dallas) or
T Town (Tulsa, Oklahoma), and their language bore up their
claims. They strutted with an aura of invincibility, and along
with some of the Mexican students who put knives in their tall
pompadours they absolutely intimidated the white girls and
those Black and Mexican students who had no shield of fear-
lessness. Fortunately | was transferred to George Washington
High School.

The beautiful buildings sat on a moderate hill in the white
residential district, some sixty blocks from the Negro neigh-
borhood. For the first semester, I was one of three Black stu-
dents in the school, and in that rarefied atmosphere I came to

love my people more. Mornings as the streetcar traversed my
ghetto I experienced a mixture of dread and trauma. I knew
that all too soon we would be out of my familiar setting, and
Blacks who were on the streetcar when I got on would all be
gone and I alone would face the forty blocks of neat streets,
smooth lawns, white houses and rich children.

In the evenings on the way home the sensations were joy,
anticipation and relief at the first sign which said BARBECUE or
DO DROP INN OF HOME COOKING or at the first brown faces on
the streets. I recognized that I was again in my country.

In the school itself I was disappointed to find that I was
not the most brilliant or even nearly the most brilliant student.
The white kids had better vocabularies than I and, what
was more appalling, less fear in the classrooms. They never
hesitated to hold up their hands in response to a teacher’s
question; even when they were wrong they were wrong
aggressively, while I had to be certain about all my facts before
I dared to call attention to myself.

George Washington High School was the first real school
I attended. My entire stay there might have been time lost if it
hadn’t been for the unique personality of.a brilliant teacher.
Miss Kirwin was that rare educator who was in love with
information. I will always believe that her love of teaching
came not so much from her liking for students but from her
desire to make sure that some of the things she knew would
find repositories so that they could be shared again.

She and her maiden sister worked in the San Francisco
city school system for over twenty years. My Miss Kirwin,
who was a tall, florid, buxom lady with battleship-gray hair,
taught civics and current events. At the end of a term in her

class our books were as clean and the pages as stiff as they had




been when they were issued to us. Miss Kirwin’s students
were never or very rarely called upon to open textbooks.

She greeted each class with “Good day, ladies and
gentlemen.” I had never heard an adult speak with such
respect to teenagers. (Adults usually believe that a show of
honor diminishes their authority.) “In today’s Chronicle there
was an article on the mining industry in the Carolinas for
some such distant subject]. I am certain that all of you have
read the article. I would like someone to elaborate on the sub-
ject for me.”

After the first two weeks in her class, I, along with all the
other excited students, read the San Francisco papers, Time
magazine, Life and everything else available to me. Miss
Kirwin proved Bailey right. He had told me once that “all
knowledge is spendable currency, depending on the market.”

There were no favorite students. No teacher’s pets. If a
student pleased her during a particular period, he could not
count on special treatment in the next day’s class, and that was
as true the other way around. Each day she faced us with a
clean slate and acted as if ours were clean as well. Reserved
and firm in her opinions, she spent no time in indulging the
frivolous.

She was stimulating instead of intimidating. Where some
of the other teachers went out of their way to be nice to me—
to be a “liberal” with me—and others ignored me completely,
Miss Kirwin never seemed to notice that I was Black and
therefore different. I was Miss Johnson and if I had the
answer to a question she posed I was never given any more
than the word “Correct,” which was what she said to every
other student with the correct answer.

Years later when I returned to San Francisco I made visits
to her classroom. She always remembered that I was Miss

Johnson, who had a good mind and should be doing some-
thing with it. I was never encouraged on those visits to loiter
or linger about her desk. She acted as if I must have had other
visits to make. I often wondered if she knew she was the only
teacher I remembered.

1 never knew why I was given a scholarship to the Cali-
fornia Labor School. It was a college for adults, and many
years later I found that it was on the House Un-American
Activities list of subversive organizations. At fourteen I
accepted a scholarship and got one for the next year as well.
In the evening classes I took drama and dance, along with
white and Black grownups. I had chosen drama simply
because I liked Hamlet’s soliloquy beginning, “To be, or not
to be.” I had never seen a play and did not connect movies
with the theater. In fact, the only times I had heard the solil-
oquy had been when [I had melodramatically recited to
myself. In front of a mirror.

It was hard to curb my love for the exaggerated gesture
and the emotive voice. When Bailey and I read poems
together, he sounded like a fierce Basil Rathbone and I like a
maddened Bette Davis. At the California Labor School a
forceful and perceptive teacher quickly and unceremoniously
separated me from melodrama.

She made me do six months of pantomime.

Bailey and Mother encouraged me to take dance, and he
privately told me that the exercise would make my legs big
and widen my hips. I needed no greater inducement.

My shyness at moving clad in black tights around a large
empty room did not last long. Of course, at first, I thought
everyone would be staring at my cucumber-shaped body with
its knobs for knees, knobs for elbows and, alas, knobs for




breasts. But they really did not notice me, and when the
teacher floated across the floor and finished in an arabesque
my fancy was taken. I would learn to move like that. I would
learn to, in her words, “occupy space.” My days angled off
Miss Kirwin’s class, dinner with Bailey and Mother, and
drama and dance.

The allegiances I owed at this time in my life would have
made very strange bedfellows: Momma with her solemn
determination, Mrs. Flowers and her books, Bailey with his
love, my mother and her gaiety, Miss Kirwin and her infor-

mation, my evening classes of drama and dance.

