CHAPTER 2

SEE



WHEN Bailey was six and I a year younger, we used to rattle
off the times tables with the speed I was later to see Chinese
children in San Francisco employ on their abacuses. Our
summer-gray pot-bellied stove bloomed rosy red during
winter, and became a severe disciplinarian threat if we were so
foolish as to indulge in making mistakes.

Uncle Willie used to sit, like a giant black Z (he had been
crippled as a child), and hear us testify to the Lafayette County
Training Schools’ abilities. His face pulled down on the left
side, as if a pulley had been attached to his lower teeth, and his
left hand was only a mite bigger than Bailey’s, but on the
second mistake or on the third hesitation his big overgrown
right hand would catch one of us behind the collar, and in the
same moment would thrust the culprit toward the dull red
heater, which throbbed like a devil’s toothache. We were
never burned, although once I might have been when I was so
terrified I tried to jump onto the stove to remove the possi-
bility of its remaining a threat. Like most children, I thought
if I could face the worst danger voluntarily, and triumph, 1


would forever have power over it. But in my case of sacrificial
effort I was thwarted. Uncle Willie held tight to my dress and
I only got close enough to smell the clean dry scent of hot iron.
We learned the times tables without understanding their
grand principle, simply because we had the capacity and no
alternative.

The tragedy of lameness seems so unfair to children that
they are embarrassed in its presence. And they, most recently
off nature’s mold, sense that they have only narrowly missed
being another of her jokes. In relief at the narrow escape, they
vent their emotions in impatience and criticism of the unlucky
cripple.

Momma related times without end, and without any show
of emotion, how Uncle Willie had been dropped when he was
three years old by a woman who was minding him. She
seemed to hold no rancor against the baby-sitter, nor for her
just God who allowed the accident. She felt it necessary to
explain over and over again to those who knew the story by
heart that he wasn’t “born that way.”

In our society, where two-legged, two-armed strong Black
men were able at best to eke out only the necessities of life,
Uncle Willie, with his starched shirts, shined shoes and
shelves full of food, was the whipping boy and butt of jokes of

‘the underemployed and underpaid. Fate not only disabled

him but laid a double-tiered barrier in his path. He was also
proud and sensitive. Therefore he couldn’t pretend that he
wasn’t crippled, nor could he deceive himself that people were
not repelled by his defect.

Only once in all the years of trying not to watch him, I saw
him pretend to himself and others that he wasn’t lame.

Coming home from school one day, I saw a dark car in
our front yard. I rushed in to find a strange man and woman

(Uncle Willie said later they were schoolteachers from Little
Rock) drinking Dr. Pepper in the cool of the Store. I sensed a
wrongness around me, like an alarm clock that had gone off
without being set.

T knew it couldn’t be the strangers. Not frequently, but
often enough, travelers pulled off the main road to buy
tobacco or soft drinks in the only Negro store in Stamps.
When I looked at Uncle Willie, | knew what was pulling my
mind’s coattails. He was standing erect behind the counter,
not leaning forward or resting on the small shelf that had been
built for him. Erect. His eyes seemed to hold me with a mix-
ture of threats and appeal.

I dutifully greeted the strangers and roamed my eyes
around for his walking stick. It was nowhere to be seen. He
said, “Uh... this this... this... uh, my niece. She’s...uh..
just come from school.” Then to the couple—“You know ...
how, uh, children are ... th-th-these days ... they play all
d-d-day at school and c-c-can’t wait to get home and pl-play
some more.”

The people smiled, very friendly.

He added, “Go on out and pl-play, Sister.”

The lady laughed in a soft Arkansas voice and said, “Well,
you know, Mr. Johnson, they say, you’re only a child once.
Have you children of your own?”

Uncle Willie looked at me with an impatience I hadn’t
seen in his face even when he took thirty minutes to loop the
laces over his high-topped shoes. “I... I thought I told you to
go... go outside and play.”

Before I left I saw him lean back on the shelves of Garret
Snuff, Prince Albert and Spark Plug chewing tobacco.

“No, ma’am ... no ch-children and no wife.” He tried a




laugh. “I have an old m-m-mother and my brother's t-two
children to |-look after.”

I didn’t mind his using us to make himself look good. In
fact, I would have pretended to be his daughter if he wanted
me to. Not only did I not feel any loyalty to my own father, I
figured that if I had been Uncle Willie’s child I would have
received much better treatment.

The couple left after a few minutes, and from the back of
the house I watched the red car scare chickens, raise dust and
disappear toward Magnolia.

Uncle Willie was making his way down the long shad-
owed aisle between the shelves and the counter—-hand over
hand, like a man climbing out of a dream. I stayed quiet and
watched him lurch from one side, bumping to the other, until
he reached the coal-oil tank. He put his hand behind that dark
recess and took his cane in the strong fist and shifted his
weight on the wooden support. He thought he had pulled
it off. .

Tll never know why it was important to him that the
couple (he said later that he’d never seen them before) would
take a picture of a whole Mr. Johnson back to Little Rock.

He must have tired of being crippled, as prisoners tire of
penitentiary bars and the guilty tire of blame. The high-

“topped shoes and the cane, his uncontrollable muscles and

thick tongue, and the looks he suffered of either contempt or
pity had simply worn him out, and for one afternoon, one part
of an afternoon, he wanted no part of them.

I understood and felt closer to him at that moment than

ever before or since.

DURING these years in Stamps, I met and fell in love with
William Shakespeare. He was my first white love. Although I

enjoyed and respected Kipling, Poe, Butler, Thackeray
and Henley, I saved my young and loyal passion for Paul
Lawrence Dunbar, Langston Hughes, James Weldon Johnson
and W.E.B. Du Bois’ “Litany at Atlanta.” But it was Shake-
speare who said, “When in disgrace with fortune and men’s
eyes.” It was a state with which I fele myself most familiar. I
pacified myself about his whiteness by saying that after all he
had been dead so long it couldn’t matter to anyone any more.

Bailey and I decided to memorize a scene from The Mer-
chant of Venice, but we realized that Momma would question
us about the author and that we’d have to tell her that Shake-
speare was white, and it wouldn’t matter to her whether he
was dead or not. So we chose “The Creation” by James
Weldon Johnson instead.



