CHAPTER 25



KNOWING Momma, I knew that I never knew Momma. Her
African-bush secretiveness and suspiciousness had been com-
pounded by slavery and confirmed by centuries of promises
made and promises broken. We have a saying among Black
Americans which describes Momma’s caution. “If you ask a
Negro where he’s been, he'll tell you where he’s going.” To
understand this important information, it is necessary to
know who uses this tactic and on whom it works. If an
unaware person is told a part of the truth (it is imperative that
the answer embody truth), he is satisfied that his query has
been answered. If an aware person (one who himself uses the
stratagem) 1s given an answer which is truthful but bears only
slightly if at all on the question, he knows that the information
he seeks is of a private nature and will not be handed to him
willingly. Thus direct denial, lying and the revelation of per-
sonal affairs are avoided.

Momma told us one day that she was taking us to Cali-
fornia. She explained that we were growing up, that we
needed to be with our parents, that Uncle Willie was, after all,










crippled, that she was getting old. All true, and yet none of
those truths satisfied our need for The Truth. The Store and
the rooms in back became a going-away factory. Momma sat
at the sewing machine all hours, making and remaking
clothes for use in California. Neighbors brought out of their
trunks pieces of material that had been packed away for
decades in blankets of mothballs (I’m certain I was the only
girl in California who went to school in water-marked moiré
skirts and yellowed satin blouses, satin-back crepe dresses and
crepe de Chine underwear).

Whatever the real reason, The Truth, for taking us to
California, I shall always think it lay mostly in an incident in
which Bailey had the leading part. Bailey had picked up the
habit of imitating Claude Rains, Herbert Marshall and George
McCready. I didn’t think it at all strange that a thirteen-
year-old boy in the unreconstructed Southern town of Stamps
spoke with an Englishy accent. His heroes included D’ Artagnan
and the Count of Monte Cristo and he affected what he thought
were their swashbuckling gallantries.

On an afternoon a few weeks before Momma revealed her
plan to take us West, Bailey came into the Store shaking. His
little face was no longer black but a dirty, colorless gray. As
was our habit upon entering the Store, he walked behind the
candy counter and leaned on the cash register. Uncle Willie
had sent him on an errand to whitefolks’ town and he wanted
an explanation for Bailey’s tardiness. After a brief moment
our uncle could see that something was wrong, and feeling
unable to cope, he called Momma from the kitchen.

“What's the matter, Bailey Junior?”

He said nothing. I knew when I saw him that it would be
useless to ask anything while he was in that state. It meant that
he had seen or heard of something so ugly or frightening that

he was paralyzed as a result. He explained when we were
smaller that when things were very bad his soul just crawled
behind his heart and curled up and went to sleep. When it
awoke, the fearful thing had gone away. Ever since we read
The Fall of the House of Usher, we had made a pact that neither
of us would allow the other to be buried without making
“absolutely, positively sure” (his favorite phrase) that the
person was dead. I also had to swear that when his soul was
sleeping I would never try to wake it, for the shock might
make it go to sleep forever. So I let him be, and after a while
Momma had to let him alone too.

I waited on customers, and walked around him or leaned
over him and, as I suspected, he didn’t respond. When the
spell wore off he asked Uncle Willie what colored people had
done to white people in the first place. Uncle Willie, who
never was one for explaining things because he took after
Momma, said little except that “colored people hadn’t even
bothered a hair on whitefolks’ heads.” Momma added that
some people said that whitefolks had come over to Africa (she
made it sound like a hidden valley on the moon) and stole the
colored people and made them slaves, -but nobody really
believed it was true. No way to explain what happened “blows
and scores” ago, but right now they had the upper hand. Their
time wasn’t long, though. Didn’t Moses lead the children of
Israel out of the bloody hands of Pharaoh and into the
Promised Land? Didn’t the Lord protect the Hebrew chil-
dren in the fiery furnace and didn’t my Lord deliver Daniel?
We only had to wait on the Lord.

Bailey said he saw a man, a colored man, whom nobody
had delivered. He was dead. (If the news hadn’t been so

important, we would have been visited with one of Momma’s




outbursts and prayers. Bailey was nearly blaspheming.) He
said, “The man was dead and rotten. Not stinking but rotten.”

Momma ordered, “Ju, watch your tongue.”

Uncle Willie asked, “Who, who was it?”

Bailey was just tall enough to clear his face over the cash
register. He said, “When I passed the calaboose, some men
had just fished him out of the pond. He was wrapped in a
sheet, all rolled up like a mummy, then a white man walked
over and pulled the sheet off. The man was on his back but
the white man stuck his foot under the sheet and rolled him
over on the stomach.”

He turned to me. “My, he had no color at all. He was
bloated like a ball.” (We had had a running argument for
months. Bailey said there was no such thing as colorlessness,
and I argued that if there was color there also had to be an
opposite and now he was admitting that it was possible. But I
didn’t feel good about my win.) “The colored men backed off
and I did too, but the white man stood there, looking down,
and grinned. Uncle Willie, why do they hate us so much?”

Uncle Willie muttered, “They don’t really hate us. They
don’t know us. How can they hate us? They mostly scared.”

Momma asked if Bailey had recognized the man, but he

_was caught in the happening and the event.

“Mr. Bubba told me I was too young to see something like
that and J oughta hightail it home, but I had to stay. Then the
white man called us closer. He said, ‘O.K., you boys, stretch
him out in the calaboose and when the Sheriff comes along
he’ll notify his people. This here’s one nigger nobody got to
worry about no more. He ain’t going nowhere else.’ Then the
men picked up corners of the sheet, but since nobody wanted
to get close to the man they held the very ends and he nearly

tolled out on the ground. The white man called me to come
and help too.”

Momma exploded. “Who was it?” She made herself clear.
“Who was the white man?”

Bailey couldn’t let go of the horror. “I picked up a side of
the sheet and walked right in the calaboose with the men. I
walked in the calaboose carrying a rotten dead Negro.” His
voice was ancient with shock. He was literally bug-eyed.

“The white man played like he was going to lock us all up
in there, but Mr. Bubba said, ‘Ow, Mr. Jim. We didn’t do it.
We ain’t done nothing wrong.’ Then the white man laughed
and said we boys couldn't take a joke, and opened the door.”
He breathed his relief. “Whew, I was glad to get out of there.
The calaboose, and the prisoners screaming they didn’t want
no dead nigger in there with them. That he’d stink up the
place. They called the white man ‘Boss.’ They said, ‘Boss,
surely we ain’t done nothing bad enough for you to put
another nigger in here with us, and a dead one at that.’ Then
they laughed. They all laughed like there was something
funny.”

Bailey was talking so fast he forgot to stutter, he forgot to
scratch his head and clean his fingernails with his teeth. He
was away in a mystery, locked in the enigma that young
Southern Black boys start to unravel, start to try to unravel,
from seven years old to death. The humorless puzzle of
inequality and hate. His experience raised the question of
worth and values, of aggressive inferiority and aggressive
arrogance. Could Uncle Willie, a Black man, Southern,
crippled moreover, hope to answer the questions, both asked
and unuttered? Would Momma, who knew the ways of the
whites and the wiles of the Blacks, try to answer her grandson,




whose very life depended on his not truly understanding the
enigma? Most assuredly not.

They both responded characteristically. Uncle Willie said
something like he didn’t know what the world was coming to,
and Momma prayed, “God rest his soul, poor man.” I’m sure
she began piecing together the details of our California trip
that night.

OUR transportation was Momma’s major concern for some
weeks. She had arranged with a railroad employee to provide
her with a pass in exchange for groceries. The pass allowed a
reduction in her fare only, and even that had to be approved,
so we were made to abide in a kind of limbo until white
people we would never see, in offices we would never visit,
signed and stamped and mailed the pass back to Momma. My
fare had to be paid in “ready cash.” That sudden drain on the
nickel-plated cash register lopsided our financial stability.
Momma decided Bailey couldn’t accompany us, since we had
to use the pass during a set time, but that he would follow
within a month or so when outstanding bills were paid.
Although our mother now lived in San Francisco, Momma
must have felt it wiser to go first to Los Angeles where our
father was. She dictated letters to me, advising them both that
we were on our way.

And we were on our way, but unable to say when. Our
clothes were washed, ironed and packed, so for an immobile
time we wore those things not good enough to glow under the
California sun. Neighbors, who understood the complications
of travel, said goodbye a million times.

“Well, if | don’t see you before your ticket comes through,
Sister Henderson, have a good trip and hurry back home.” A
widowed friend of Momma’s had agreed to look after (cook,

wash, clean and provide company for) Uncle Willie, and after
thousands of arrested departures, at last we left Stamps.

My sorrow at leaving was confined to a gloom at sepa-
rating from Bailey for a month (we had never been parted),
the imagined loneliness of Uncle Willie (he put on a goad face,
though at thirty-five he’d never been separated from his
mother) and the loss of Louise, my first friend. I wouldn’t miss
Mrs. Flowers, for she had given me her secret word which
called forth a djinn who was to serve me all my life: books.



