CHAPTER 22

wey



THE wind blew over the roof and ruffled the shingles. It
whistled sharp under the closed door. The chimney made
fearful sounds of protest as it was invaded by the urgent gusts.
A mile away ole Kansas City Kate (the train much
admired but too important to stop in Stamps) crashed through
the middle of town, blew its wooo-wee warnings, and con-
tinued to an unknown glamorous destination without look-
ing back.
There was going to be a storm and it was a perfect night
for rereading Jane Eyre. Bailey had finished his chores and was
already behind the stove with Mark Twain. It was my turn to
close the Store, and my book, half read, lay on the candy
counter. Since the weather was going to be bad I was sure
Uncle Willie would agree, in fact, encourage me to close early
(save electricity) and join the family in Momma’s bedroom,
which functioned as our sitting room. Few people would be
out in weather that threatened a tornado (for though the wind
blew, the sky was as clear and still as a summer morning).
Momma agreed that I might as well close, and I went out on

the porch, closed the shutters, slipped the wooden bar over the
door and turned off the light.

Pots rattled in the kitchen where Momma was frying corn
cakes to go with vegetable soup for supper, and the homey
sounds and scents cushioned me as I read of Jane Eyre in the
cold English mansion of a colder English gentleman. Uncle
Willie was engrossed in the Almanac, his nightly reading, and
my brother was far away on a raft on the Mississippi.

I was the first to hear the rattle on the back door. A rattle
and knock, a knock and rattle. But suspecting that it might
have been the mad wife in the tower, I didn’t credit it. Then
Uncle Willie heard it and summoned Bailey back from Huck
Finn to unlatch the bolt.

Through the open door the moonshine fell into the room
in a cold radiance to rival our meager lamplight. We all
waited—TI with a dread expectancy—for no human being was
there. The wind alone came in, struggling with the weak
flame in the coal-oil lamp. Pushing and bunting about the
family warmth of our pot-bellied stove. Uncle Willie thought
it must have been the storm and told Bailey to close the door.
But just before he secured the raw wooden slab a voice drifted
through the crack; it wheezed, “Sister Henderson? Brother
Willie?”

Bailey nearly closed the door again, but Uncle Willie
asked, “Who is it?” and Mr. George Taylor’s pinched brown
face swam out of the gray and into view. He assured himself
that we hadn’t gone to bed, and was welcomed in. When
Momma saw him she invited him to stay for supper and told
me to stick some sweet potatoes in the ashes to stretch the eve-
ning meal. Poor Brother Taylor had been taking meals all
over town, ever since he buried his wife in the summer.
Maybe due to the fact that I was in my romanticist period, or




because children have a built-in survival apparatus, I feared he
was interested in marrying Momma and moving in with us.

Uncle Willie cradled the Almanac in his divided lap. “You
welcome here anytime, Brother Taylor, anytime, but this is a
bad night. It say right here’—with his crippled hand he
rapped the A/manae—“that November twelfth, a storm going
to be moving over Stamps out of the east. A rough night.” Mr.
Taylor remained exactly in the same position he had taken
when he arrived, like a person too cold to readjust his body
even to get closer to the fire. His neck was bent and the red
light played over the polished skin of his hairless head. But his
eyes bound me with a unique attraction. They sat deep in his
little face and completely dominated the other features with a
roundness which seemed to be outlined in dark pencil, giving
him an owlish appearance. And when he sensed my regarding
him so steadily his head hardly moved but his eyes swirled
and landed on me. If his look had contained contempt or
patronage, or any of the vulgar emotions revealed by adults in
confrontation with children, I would have easily gone back to
my book, but his eyes gave off a watery nothing—a nothing-
ness which was completely unbearable. I saw a glassiness,
observed before only in new marbles or a bottle top embedded
in a block of ice. His glance moved so swiftly from me it was
nearly possible to imagine that I had in fact imagined the
interchange.

“But, as I say, you welcome. We can always make a place
under this roof.” Uncle Willie didn’t seem to notice that Mr.
Taylor was oblivious to everything he said. Momma brought
the soup into the room, took the kettle off the heater and
placed the steaming pot on the fire. Uncle Willie continued,
“Momma, I told Brother Taylor he is welcome here anytime.”
Momma said, “That’s right, Brother Taylor. You not

supposed to sit around that lonely house feeling sorry for
yourself. The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away.”

I’m not sure whether it was Momma’s presence or the bub-
bling soup on the stove which influenced him, but Mr. Taylor
appeared to have livened up considerably. He shook his shoul-
ders as if shaking off a tiresome touch, and attempted a smile
that failed. “Sister Henderson, T sure appreciate ... ] mean, I
don’t know what I'd do if it wasn’t for everybody ... I mean,
you don’t know what it’s worth to me to be able to... Well, I
mean I’m thankful.” At each pause, he pecked his head over
his chest like a turtle coming out of its shell, but his eyes didn’t
move.

Momma, always self-conscious at public displays of emo-
tions not traceable to a religious source, told me to come with
her and we’d bring the bread and bowls. She carried the food
and I trailed after her, bringing the kerosene lamp. The new
light set the room in an eerie, harsh perspective. Bailey still sat,
doubled over his book, a Black hunchbacked gnome. A finger
forerunning his eyes along the page. Uncle Willie and Mr.
Taylor were frozen like people in a book on the history of the
American Negro.

“Now, come on, Brother Taylor.” Momma was pressing a
bowl of soup on him. “You may not be hungry, but take this
for nourishment.” Her voice had the tender concern of a
healthy person speaking to an invalid, and her plain statement
rang thrillingly true: “I’m thankful.” Bailey came out of his
absorption and went to wash his hands.

“Willie, say the blessing.” Momma set Bailey’s bowl down
and bowed her head. During grace, Bailey stood in the
doorway, a figure of obedience, but I knew his mind was on

Tom Sawyer and Jim as mine would have been on Jane Eyre




and Mr. Rochester, but for the glittering eyes of wizened old
Mr. Taylor.

Our guest dutifully took a few spoonfuls of soup and bit a
semicircle in the bread, then put his bowl on the floor. Some-
thing in the fire held his attention as we ate noisily.

Noticing his withdrawal, Momma said, “It don’t do for
you to take on so, I know you all was together a long time—”

Uncle Willie said, “Forty years.”

“——but it’s been around six months since she’s gone to her
rest... and you got to keep faith. He never gives us more than
we can bear.” The statement heartened Mr. Taylor. He
picked up his bowl again and raked his spoon through the
thick soup.

Momma saw that she had made some contact, so she went
on, “You had a whole lot of good years. Got to be grateful for
them. Only thing is, it’s a pity you all didn’t have some
children.”

If my head had been down I would have missed Mr.
Taylor’s metamorphosis. It was not a change that came by
steps but rather, it seemed to me, of a sudden. His bowl was
on the floor with a thud, and his body leaned toward Momma
from the hips. However, his face was the most striking feature
of all. The brown expanse seemed to darken with life, as if an
inner agitation played under his thin skin. The mouth,
opened to show the long teeth, was a dark room furnished
with a few white chairs.

“Children.” He gum-balled the word around in his empty
mouth. “Yes, sir, children.” Bailey (and I), used to be addressed
so, looked at him expectantly.

“That’s what she want.” His eyes were vital, and straining
to jump from the imprisoning sockets. “That’s what she said.

Children.”

The air was weighted and thick. A bigger house had been
set on our roof and was imperceptibly pushing us into the
ground.

Momma asked, in her nice-folks voice, “What who said,
Brother Taylor?” She knew the answer. We all knew the
answer.

“Florida.” His little wrinkled hands were making fists,
then straightening, then making fists again. “She said it just
last night.”

Bailey and IJ looked at each other and I hunched my chair
closer to him. “Said ‘IT want some children.’ ” When he pitched
his already high voice to what he considered a feminine level,
or at any rate to his wife’s, Miz Florida’s, level, it streaked
across the room, zigzagging like lightning.

Uncle Willie had stopped eating and was regarding him
with something like pity. “Maybe you was dreaming, Brother
Taylor. Could have been a dream.”

Momma came in placatingly. “That’s right. You know,
the children was reading me something th’other day. Say folks
dream about whatever was on their mind when they went to
sleep.”

Mr. Taylor jerked himself up. “It wasn’t not no dream. [
was as wide awake as I am this very minute.” He was angry
and the tension increased his little mask of strength.

“Pll tell you what happened.”

Oh, Lord, a ghost story. I hated and dreaded the long
winter nights when late customers came to the Store to sit
around the heater roasting peanuts and trying to best each
other in telling lurid tales of ghosts and hants, banshees and
juju, voodoo and other anti-life stories, But a real one, that
happened to a real person, and last night. It was going to be
intolerable. | got up and walked to the window.




* * *

Mrs. Florida Taylor’s funeral in June came on the heels of
our final exams. Bailey and Louise and I had done very well
and were pleased with ourselves and each other. The summer
stretched golden in front of us with promises of picnics and
fish frys, blackberry hunts and croquet games will dark. It
would have taken a personal loss to penetrate my sense of
well-being. I had met and loved the Bronté sisters, and had
replaced Kipling’s “If” with “Invictus.” My friendship with
Louise was solidified over jacks, hopscotch and confessions,
deep and dark, exchanged often after many a “Cross your
heart you won’t tell?” I never talked about St. Louis to her,
and had generally come to believe that the nightmare with its
attendant guilt and fear hadn’t really happened to me. It hap-
pened to a nasty little girl, years and years before, who had no
chain on me at all.

At first the news that Mrs. Taylor was dead did not strike
me as a particularly newsy bit of information. As children do,
I thought that since she was very old she had only one thing to
do, and that was to die. She was a pleasant enough woman,
with her steps made mincing by age and her little hands like
gentle claws that liked to touch young skin. Each time she

‘came to the Store, I was forced to go up to her, while she

raked her yellow nails down my cheeks. “You sure got a
pretty complexion.” [t was a rare compliment in a world of
very few such words of praise, so it balanced being touched by
the dry fingers.

“You going to the funeral, Sister.” Momma wasn’t asking
a question.

Momma said, “You going ’cause Sister Taylor thought so
much of you she left you her yellow brooch.” (She wouldn’t

say “gold,” because it wasn’t.) “She told Brother Taylor, ‘T
want Sis Henderson’s grandbaby to have my gold brooch.’ So
you'll have to go.”

I had followed a few coffins up the hill from the church to
the cemetery, but because Momma said I was tender-hearted I
had never been forced to sit through a funeral service. At eleven
years old, death is more unreal than frightening. It seemed a
waste of a good afternoon to sit in church for a silly old brooch,
which was not only not gold but was too old for me to wear, But
if Momma said I had to go it was certain that I would be there.

The mourners on the front benches sat in a blue-serge,
black-crepe-dress gloom. A funeral hymn made its way
around the church tediously but successfully. It eased into the
heart of every gay thought, into the care of each happy
memory. Shattering the light and hopeful: “On the other side
of Jordan, there is a peace for the weary, there is a peace for
me.” The inevitable destination of all living things seemed but
a short step away. I had never considered before that dying,
death, dead, passed away, were words and phrases that might
be even faintly connected with me.

But on that onerous day, oppressed beyond relief, my own
mortality was borne in upon me on sluggish tides of doom.

No sooner had the mournful song run its course than the
minister took to the altar and delivered a sermon that in my
state gave little comfort. Its subject was, “Thou art my good
and faithful servant with whom I am well pleased.” His voice
enweaved itself through the somber vapors left by the dirge.
In a monotonous tone he warned the listeners that “this day
might be your last,” and the best insurance against dying a
sinner was to “make yourself right with God” so that on the
fateful day He would say, “Thou art my good and faithful ser-
vant with whom I am well pleased.”




After he had put the fear of the cold grave under our
skins, he began to speak of Mrs. Taylor, “A gadly woman,
who gave to the poor, visited the sick, tithed to the church and
in general lived a life of goodliness.” At this point he began to
talk directly to the coffin, which I had noticed upon my arrival
and had studiously avoided thereafter.

“T hungered and you gave me to eat. I was thirsty and you
gave me to drink. I was sick and you visited me. In prison, and
you left me not. Inasmuch as you have done it unto the least of
one of these, you have done it unto Me.” He bounded off the
dais and approached the velvet gray box. With an imperious
gesture, he snatched the gray cloth off the open flap and gazed
downward into the mystery.

“Sleep on, thy graceful soul, till Christ calls you to come
forth into His bright heaven.”

He continued speaking directly to the dead woman, and |
half wished she would rise up and answer him, offended by
the coarseness of his approach. A scream burst from Mr.
Taylor. He stood up suddenly and lengthened his arms
toward the minister, the coffin and his wife's corpse. For a
long minute he hovered, his back to the church as the instruc-
tive words kept falling around the room, rich with promise,

full with warnings. Momma and other ladies caught him in

time to bring him back to the bench, where he quickly folded
upon himself like a Br’er Rabbit rag doll.

Mr. Taylor and the high church officials were the first to
file around the bier to wave farewell to the departed and get a
glimpse of what lay in store for all men. Then on heavy feet,
made more ponderous by the guilt of the living viewing the
dead, the adult church marched up to the coffin and back to
their seats. Their faces, which showed apprehension before

reaching the coffin, revealed, on the way down the opposite
aisle, a final confirmation of their fears. Watching them was a
little hke peeping through a window when the shade is not
drawn flush. Although I didn’t try, it was impossible not to
record their roles in the drama.

And then a black-dressed usher stuck her hand out wood-
enly toward the children’s rows. There was the shifty rustling
of unreadiness but finally a boy of fourteen led us off and I
dared not hang back, as much as I hated the idea of seeing
Mrs. Taylor. Up the aisle, the moans and screams merged
with the sickening smell of woolen black clothes worn in
summer weather and green leaves wilting over yellow
flowers. I couldn’t distinguish whether I was smelling the
clutching sound of misery or hearing the cloying odor of
death.

It would have been easier to see her through the gauze,
but instead I looked down on the stark face that seemed sud-
denly so empty and evil. It knew secrets that I never wanted to
share. The cheeks had fallen back to the ears and a solicitous
mortician had put lipstick on the black mouth. The scent of
decay was sweet and clasping. It groped for life with a hunger
both greedy and hateful. But it was hypnotic. I wanted to be
off but my shoes had glued themselves to the floor and I had to
hold on to the sides of the coffin to remain standing. The
unexpected halt in the moving line caused the children to
press upon each other, and whispers of no small intent
reached my ears.

“Move along, Sister, move along.” It was Momma. Her
voice tugged at my will and someone pushed from the rear, so
I was freed.

Instantly I surrendered myself to the grimness of death.
The change it had been able to effect in Mrs. Taylor showed




that its strength could not be resisted. Her high-pitched voice,
which parted the air in the Store, was forever stilled, and the
plump brown face had been deflated and patted flat like a
cow’s ordurous dropping.

The coffin was carried on a horse-drawn wagon to the
cemetery, and all the way I communed with death’s angels,
questioning their choice of time, place and person.

For the first time the burial ceremony had meaning
for me.

“Ashes to ashes and dust to dust.” It was certain that Mrs.
Taylor was returning to the earth from whence she came. In
face, upon considering, I concluded that she had looked like a
mud baby, lying on the white satin of her velvet coffin. A mud
baby, molded into form by creative children on a rainy day,
soon to run back into the loose earth.

THE memory of the grim ceremony had been so real to me
that I was surprised to look up and see Momma and Uncle
Wilhe eating by the stove. They were neither anxious nor
hesitant, as if they knew a man has to say what he has to say.
But I didn’t want to hear any of it, and the wind, allying itself
with me, threatened the chinaberry tree outside the back door.

“Last night, after I said my prayers, I lay down on the bed.
Well, you know it’s the same bed she died on.” Oh, if he’d
shut up. Momma said, “Sister, sit down and eat your soup.
Cold night like this you need something hot in your stomach.
Go on, Brother Taylor. Please.” I sat down as near Bailey as
possible.

“Well, something told me to open my eyes.”

“What kind of something?” Momma asked, not laying
down her spoon.

“Yes, sir,” Uncle Willie explained, “there can be a good
something and there can be a bad something.”

“Well, I wasn’t sure, so I figured better open ’em, ‘cause it
could have been, well, either one. I did, and the first thing, I
saw little baby angel. It was just as fat as a butterball, and
laughing, eyes blue, blue, blue.”

Uncle Willie asked, “A baby angel?”

“Yes, sir, and it was laughing right in my face. Then I
heard this long moan, ‘Agh-h-h-. Well, as you say, Sister
Henderson, we been together over forty years. I know
Florida’s voice. | wasn’t scared right then. I called ‘Florida?’
Then that angel laughed harder and the moan got louder.”

I set my bowl down and got closer to Bailey. Mrs. Taylor
had been a very pleasant woman, smiling all the time and
patient. The only thing that jarred and bothered me when she
came in the Store was her voice. Like near-deaf people, she
screamed, half not hearing what she was saying and partly
hoping her listeners would reply in kind. That was when she
was living. The thought of that voice coming out of the grave
and all the way down the hill from the cemetery and hanging
over my head was enough to straighten my hair.

“Yes, sir.” He was looking at the stove and the red glow fell
on his face. It seemed as if he had a fire going inside his head.
“First I called, ‘Florida, Florida. What do you want?’ And that
devilish angel kept on laughing to beat the band.” Mr. Taylor
tried to laugh and only succeeded in looking frightened. “ ‘I
want some...’ ‘That’s when she said ‘I want some.’ ”” He made
his voice sound like the wind, if the wind had bronchial pneu-
monia. He wheezed, “ ‘I want some chi-il-dren.’ ”

Bailey and I met halfway on the drafty floor.
Momma said, “Now, Brother Taylor, could be you was




dreaming. You know, they say whatever you goes to bed with
on your mind...”

“No, ma’am, Sister Henderson, I was as wide awake as |
am right now.”

“Did she let you see her?” Uncle Willie had a dreamy look
on his face.

“No, Willie, all I seed was that fat little white baby
angel. But wasn’t no mistaking that voice ... ‘I want some
children.’ ”

The cold wind had frozen my feet and my spine, and Mr.
Taylor’s impersonation had chilled my blood.

Momma said, “Sister, go bring the long fork to take the
potatoes out.”

“Ma'am?” Surely she didn’t mean the long fork that
hung on the wall behind the kitchen stove—a scary million
miles away.

“T said, go get the fork. The potatoes are burning.”

T unwound my legs from the gripping fear and almost
tripped onto the stove. Momma said, “That child would
stumble over the pattern in a rug. Go on, Brother Taylor, did
she say any more?”

I didn’t want to hear it if she did, but I wasn’t eager to
leave the lighted room where my family sat around the

-friendly fire.

“Well, she said ‘Aaah’ a few more times and then that
angel started to walk off the ceiling. I tell you I] was purt’ near
scared stiff.”

I had reached the no man’s ocean of darkness. No great
decision was called for. I knew it would be torturous to go
through the thick blackness of Uncle Willie’s bedroom, but it
would be easier than staying around to hear the ghoulish
story. Also, I couldn’t afford to aggravate Momma. When she

was displeased she made me sleep on the edge of the bed and
that night I knew I needed to be close to her.

One foot into the darkness and the sense of detachment
from reality nearly made me panic. The idea came to me that I
might never get out into the light again. Quickly I found the
door leading back to the familiar, but as I opened it the awful
story reached out and tried to grab my ears. I closed the door.

Naturally, I believed in hants and ghosts and “thangs.”
Having been raised by a super-religious Southern Negro
grandmother, it would have been abnormal had IJ not been
superstitious.

The trip to the kitchen and back could not have taken
more than two minutes, yet in that time I tramped through
swampy cemeteries, climbed over dusty gravestones and
eluded litters of night-black cats.

Back in the family circle, I remarked to myself how like a
cyclopean eye was the belly of the red-hot stove.

“Te reminded me of the time when my daddy died. You
know we're very close.” Mr. Taylor had hypnotized himself
into the eerie world of horrors.

I broke into his reminiscences. “Momma, here’s the fork.”
Bailey had Jain down on his side behind the stove and his eyes
were shining. He was more fascinated with Mr. Taylor’s
morbid interest in his story than with the tale itself.

Momma put her hand on my arm and said, “You shaking,
Sister. What’s the matter?” My skin still rippled from the
experience of fear.

Uncle Willie laughed and said, “Maybe she was scared to
go in the kitchen.”

His high little laugh didn’t fool me. Everyone was uneasy
at being beckoned into the unknown.




“No sir, I ain’t never seen nothing so clear as that little
angel baby.” His jaws were scissoring mechanically on the
already mushy sweet potatoes. “Just laughing, like a house on
fire. What you reckon it mean, Sister Henderson?”

Momma had reared back in her rocking chair, a half
smile on her face, “If you sure you wasn’t dreaming, Brother
Taylor...”

“I was as wide awake as I am”——he was becoming angry
again—“as I am right now.”

“Well, then, maybe it means—”

“T ought to know when I’m asleep and when I’m awake.”

“—~-maybe it mean Sister Florida wants you to work with
the children in the church.”

“One thing I always used to tell Florida, people won’t let
you get your words in edgewise—-”

“Could be she’s trying to tell you”

“I ain’t crazy, you know. My mind’s just as good as it
was.”

“—_to take a Sunday school class—”

“Thirty years ago. If I say I was awake when I saw that
little fat angel, then people ought to—”

“Sunday school need more teachers. Lord knows that’s so.”

“—~believe me when I say so.”

Their remarks and responses were like a Ping-Pong game
with each volley clearing the net and flying back to the opposi-
tion. The sense of what they were saying became lost, and only
the exercise remained. The exchange was conducted with the
certainty of a measured hoedown and had the jerkiness of
Monday’s wash snapping in the wind—-now cracking east,
then west, with only the intent to whip the dampness out of
the cloth.

Within a few minutes the intoxication of doom had fled,

as if it had never been, and Momma was encouraging Mr.
Taylor to take in one of the Jenkins boys to help him with his
farm. Uncle Willie was nodding at the fire, and Bailey had
escaped back to the calm adventures of Huckleberry Finn.
The change in the room was remarkable. Shadows which had
lengthened and darkened over the bed in the corner had dis-
appeared or revealed themselves as dark images of familiar
chairs and such. The light which dashed on the ceiling
steadied, and imitated rabbits rather than lions, and donkeys
instead of ghouls.

I laid a pallet for Mr. Taylor in Uncle Willie’s room and
crawled under Momma, who I knew for the first time was so
good and righteous she could command the fretful spirits, as
Jesus had commanded the sea. “Peace, be still.”



