CHAPTER 1

Sey



WHEN I was three and Bailey four, we had arrived in
the musty little town, wearing tags on our wrists which
instructed—“To Whom It May Concern”—that we were Mar-
guerite and Bailey Johnson Jr., from Long Beach, California, en
route to Stamps, Arkansas, c/o Mrs. Annie Henderson.

Our parents had decided to put an end to their calamitous
marriage, and Father shipped us home to his mother. A porter
had been charged with our welfare—he got off the train the
next day in Arizona—and our tickets were pinned to my
brother’s inside coat pocket.

I don’t remember much of the trip, but after we reached
the segregated southern part of the journey, things must have
looked up. Negro passengers, who always traveled with
loaded lunch boxes, felt sorry for “the poor little motherless
darlings” and plied us with cold fried chicken and potato
salad.

Years later [ discovered that the United States had been
crossed thousands of times by frightened Black children trav-
eling alone to their newly affluent parents in Northern cities,

or back to grandmothers in Southern towns when the urban
North reneged on its economic promises.

The town reacted to us as its inhabitants had reacted to all
things new before our coming. It regarded us a while without
curiosity but with caution, and after we were seen to be harm-
less (and children) it closed in around us, as a real mother
embraces a stranger’s child. Warmly, but not too familiarly.

We lived with our grandmother and uncle in the rear of
the Store (it was always spoken of with a capital s), which she
had owned some twenty-five years.

Early in the century, Momma (we soon stopped calling
her Grandmother) sold lunches to the sawmen in the lumber-
yard (east Stamps) and the seedmen at the cotton gin (west
Stamps). Her crisp meat pies and cool lemonade, when joined
to her miraculous ability to be in two places at the same ume,
assured her business success. From being a mobile lunch
counter, she set up a stand between the two points of fiscal
interest and supplied the workers’ needs for a few years. Then
she had the Store built in the heart of the Negro area. Over the
years it became the lay center of activities in town. On Satur-
days, barbers sat their customers in the shade on the porch of
the Store, and troubadours on their ceaseless crawlings
through the South leaned across its benches and sang their sad
songs of The Brazos while they played juice harps and cigar-
box guitars.

The formal name of the Store was the Wm. Johnson Gen-
eral Merchandise Store. Customers could find food staples, a
good variety of colored thread, mash for hogs, corn for
chickens, coal oil for lamps, light bulbs for the wealthy, shoe-
strings, hair dressing, balloons, and flower seeds. Anything
not visible had only to be ordered.

Until we became familiar enough to belong to the Store


and it to us, we were locked up in a Fun House of Things
where the attendant had gone home for life.

Eacu year I watched the field across from the Store turn
caterpillar green, then gradually frosty white. | knew exactly
how long it would be before the big wagons would pull into
the front yard and load on the cotton pickers at daybreak to
carry them to the remains of slavery’s plantations.

During the picking season my grandmother would get out
of bed at four o’clock (she never used an alarm clock) and
creak down to her knees and chant in a sleep-filled voice,
“Our Father, thank you for letting me see this New Day.
Thank you that you didn’t allow the bed I lay on last night to
be my cooling board, nor my blanket my winding sheet.
Guide my feet this day along the straight and narrow, and
help me to put a bridle on my tongue. Bless this house,
and everybody in it. Thank you, in the name of your Son,
Jesus Christ, Amen.”

Before she had quite arisen, she called our names and
issued orders, and pushed her large feet into homemade slip-
pers and across the bare lye-washed wooden floor to light the
coal-oil lamp.

The lamplight in the Store gave a soft make-believe

- feeling to our world which made me want to whisper and
walk about on tiptoe. The odors of onions and oranges and
kerosene had been mixing all night and wouldn’t be disturbed
until the wooded slat was removed from the door and the
early morning air forced its way in with the bodies of people
who had walked miles to reach the pickup place.

“Sister, Pll have two cans of sardines.”

“I’m gonna work so fast today I’m gonna make you look
like you standing still.”

“Lemme have a hunk uh cheese and some sody crackers.”

“Just gimme a coupla them fat peanut paddies.” That
would be from a picker who was taking his lunch. The greasy
brown paper sack was stuck behind the bib of his overalls.
He’d use the candy as a snack before the noon sun called the
workers to rest.

In those tender mornings the Store was full of laughing,
joking, boasting and bragging. One man was going to pick
two hundred pounds of cotton, and another three hundred.
Even the children were promising to bring home fo’ bits and
six bits.

The champion picker of the day before was the hero of the
dawn. If he prophesied that the cotton in today’s field was
going to be sparse and stick to the bolls like glue, every listener
would grunt a hearty agreement.

The sound of the empty cotton sacks dragging over the
floor and the murmurs of waking people were sliced by
the cash register as we rang up the five-cent sales.

If the morning sounds and smells were touched with the
supernatural, the late afternoon had all the features of the
normal Arkansas life. In the dying sunlight the people
dragged, rather than their empty cotton sacks.

Brought back to the Store, the pickers would step out of
the backs of trucks and fold down, dirt-disappointed, to the
ground. No matter how much they had picked, it wasn’t
enough. Their wages wouldn’t even get them out of debt to
my grandmother, not to mention the staggering bill that
waited on them at the white commissary downtown.

The sounds of the new morning had been replaced with
grumbles about cheating houses, weighted scales, snakes,
skimpy cotton and dusty rows. In later years I was to confront
the stereotyped picture of gay song-singing cotton pickers




with such inordinate rage that I was told even by fellow
Blacks that my paranoia was embarrassing. But I had seen the
fingers cut by the mean little cotton bolls, and I had witnessed
the backs and shoulders and arms and legs resisting any fur-
ther demands.

Some of the workers would leave their sacks at the Store
to be picked up the following morning, but a few had to take
them home for repairs. I winced to picture them sewing the
coarse material under a coal-oil lamp with fingers suffening
from the day’s work. In too few hours they would have to
walk back to Sister Henderson’s Store, get vittles and load,
again, onto the trucks. Then they would face another day of
trying to earn enough for the whole year with the heavy
knowledge that they were going to end the season as they
started it. Without the money or credit necessary to sustain a
family for three months. In cotton-picking time the late after-
noons revealed the harshness of Black Southern life, which in
the early morning had been softened by nature’s blessing of
grogginess, forgetfulness and the soft lamplight.


