CHAPTER 17

Sey



WEEKDAYS revolved on a sameness wheel. They turned into
themselves so steadily and inevitably that each seemed to be
the original of yesterday's rough draft. Saturdays, however,
always broke the mold and dared to be different.

Farmers trekked into town with their children and wives
streaming around them. Their board-stiff khaki pants and
shirts revealed the painstaking care of a dutiful daughter or
wife. They often stopped at the Store to get change for bills so
they could give out jangling coins to their children, who shook
with their eagerness to get to town. The young kids openly
resented their parents’ dawdling in the Store and Uncle Willie
would call them in and spread among them bits of sweet
peanut pattics that had been broken in shipping. They
gobbled down the candies and were out again, kicking up the
powdery dust in the road and worrying if there was going to
be time to get to town after all.

Bailey played mumbledypeg with the older boys around
the chinaberry tree, and Momma and Uncle Willie listened to
the farmers’ latest news of the country. I thought of myself as




hanging in the Store, a mote imprisoned on a shaft of sunlight.
Pushed and pulled by the slightest shift of air, but never
falling free into the tempting darkness.

In the warm months, morning began with a quick wash in
unheated well water. The suds were dashed on a plot of
ground beside the kitchen door. It was called the bait garden
(Bailey raised worms). After prayers, breakfast in summer
was usually dry cereal and fresh milk. Then to our chores
(which on Saturday included weekday jobs)—scrubbing the
floors, raking the yards, polishing our shoes for Sunday (Uncle
Willie’s had to be shined with a biscuit) and attending to the
customers who came breathlessly, also in their Saturday
hurry.

Looking through the years, I marvel that Saturday was
my favorite day in the week. What pleasures could have been
squeezed between the fan folds of unending tasks? Children’s
talent to endure stems from their ignorance of alternatives.

After our retreat from St. Louis, Momma gave us a
weekly allowance. Since she seldom dealt with money, other
than to take it in and to tithe to the church, I supposed that the
weekly ten cents was to tell us that even she realized that a
change had come over us, and that our new unfamiliarity
caused her to treat us with a strangeness.

- T usually gave my money to Bailey, who went to the
movies nearly every Saturday. He brought back Street and
Smith cowboy books for me.

One Saturday Bailey was late coming back from the Rye-
al-toh. Momma had begun heating water for the Saturday-
night baths, and all the evening chores were done. Uncle
Willie sat in the twilight on the front porch mumbling or
maybe singing, and smoking a ready-made. It was quite late.
Mothers had called in their children from the group games,

and fading sounds of “Yah... Yah... you didn’t catch me”
sull hung and floated into the Store.

Uncle Willie said, “Sister, better light the light.” On Sat-
urdays we used the electric lights so that last-minute Sunday
shoppers could look down the hill and see if the Store was
open. Momma hadn’t told me to turn them on because she
didn’t want to believe that night had fallen hard and Bailey
was still out in the ungodly dark.

Her apprehension was evident in the hurried movements
around the kitchen and in her lonely fearing eyes. The Black
woman in the South who raises sons, grandsons and nephews
had her heartstrings tied to a hanging noose. Any break from
routine may herald for them unbearable news. For this
reason, Southern Blacks until the present generation could be
counted among America’s arch conservatives.

Like most self-pitying people, I had very little pity for my
relatives’ anxiety. If something indeed had happened to
Bailey, Uncle Willie would always have Momma, and
Momma had the Store. Then, after all, we weren’t their chil-
dren. But I would be the major loser if Bailey turned up dead.
For he was all I claimed, if not all I had.

The bath water was steaming on the cooking stove,
but Momma was scrubbing the kitchen table for the ump-
teenth time.

“Momma,” Uncle Willie called and she jumped.
“Momma.” I waited in the bright lights of the Store, jealous
that someone had come along and told these strangers some-
thing about my brother and I would be the last to know.

“Momma, why don’t you and Sister walk down to meet
him?”

To my knowledge Bailey’s name hadn’t been mentioned
for hours, but we all knew whom he meant.






Of course. Why didn’t that occur to me? I wanted to be
gone. Momma said, “Wait a minute, little lady. Go get your
sweater, and bring me my shawl.”

Tt was darker in the road than I’d thought it would be.
Momma swung the flashlight’s arc over the path and weeds
and scary tree trunks. The night suddenly became enemy ter-
ritory, and I knew that if my brother was lost in this land he
was forever lost. He was eleven and very smart, that I granted,
but after all he was so small. The Bluebeards and tigers and
Rippers could eat him up before he could scream for help.

Momma told me to take the light and she reached for my
hand. Her voice came from a high hill above me and in the
dark my hand was enclosed in hers. I loved her with a rush.
She said nothing—no “Don’t worry” or “Don’t get tender-
hearted.” Just the gentle pressure of her rough hand conveyed
her own concern and assurance to me.

We passed houses which I knew well by daylight but
couldn’t recollect in the swarthy gloom.

“Evening, Miz Jenkins.” Walking and pulling me along.

“Sister Henderson? Anything wrong?” That was from an
outline blacker than the night.

“No, ma’am. Not a thing. Bless the Lord.” By the time she
finished speaking we had left the worried neighbors far
behind.

Mr. Willie Williams’ Do Drop Inn was bright with furry
red lights in the distance and the pond’s fishy smell enveloped
us. Momma’s hand tightened and let go, and I saw the small
figure plodding along, tired and old-mannish. Hands in his
pockets and head bent, he walked like a man trudging up the
hill behind a coffin.

“Bailey.” It jumped out as Momma said, “Ju,” and I
started to run, but her hand caught mine again and became a

vise. I pulled, but she yanked me back to her side. “We'll
walk, just like we been walking, young lady.” There was no
chance to warn Bailey that he was dangerously late, that
everybody had been worried and that he should create a good
lie or, better, a great one.

Momma said, “Bailey, Junior,” and he looked up without
surprise. “You know it’s night and you just now getting
home?”

“Yes, ma’am.” He was empty. Where was his alibi?

“What you been doing?”

“Nothing.”

“That’s all you got to say?”

“Yes, ma’am.”

“All right, young man. We'll see when you get home.”

She had turned me loose, so I made a grab for Bailey’s
hand, but he snatched it away. I said, “Hey, Bail,” hoping to
remind him that I was his sister and his only friend, but he
grumbled something like “Leave me alone.”

Momma didn’t turn on the flashlight on the way back, nor
did she answer the questioning Good evenings that floated
around us as we passed the darkened houses.

I was confused and frightened. He was going to get a
whipping and maybe he had done something terrible. If he
couldn’t talk to me it must have been serious. But there was no
air of spent revelry about him. He just seemed sad. I didn’t
know what to think.

Uncle Willie said, “Getting too big for your britches, huh?
You can’t come home. You want to worry your grandmother
to death?” Bailey was so far away he was beyond fear. Uncle
Willie had a leather belt in his good hand but Bailey didn’t
notice or didn’t care. “I’m going to whip you this time.” Our
uncle had only whipped us once before and then only with a




peach-tree switch, so maybe now he was going to kill my
brother. I screamed and grabbed for the belt, but Momma
caught me. “Now, don’t get uppity, miss, less you want some
of the same thing. He got a lesson coming to him. You come
on and get your bath.”

From the kitchen I heard the belt fall down, dry and raspy
on naked skin. Uncle Willie was gasping for breath, but Bailey
made no sound. I was too afraid to splash water or even to cry
and take a chance of drowning out Bailey’s pleas for help, but
the pleas never came and the whipping was finally over.

I lay awake an eternity, waiting for a sign, a whimper ora
whisper, from the next room that he was still alive. Just before
I fell exhausted into sleep, I heard Bailey: “Now I lay me
down to sleep, I pray the Lord my soul to keep, if I should die
before I wake, I pray the Lord my soul to take.”

My last memory of that night was the question, Why is he
saying the baby prayer? We had been saying the “Our Father,
which art in heaven” for years.

For days the Store was a strange country, and we were all
newly arrived immigrants. Bailey didn’t talk, smile or apolo-
gize. His eyes were so vacant, it seemed his soul had flown
away, and at meals I tried to give him the best pieces of meat
and the largest portion of dessert, but he turned them down.
-. Then one evening at the pig pen he said without warning,
“T saw Mother Dear.”

If he said it, it was bound to be the truth. He wouldn’t lie
to me. I don’t think I asked him where or when.

“In the movies,” He laid his head on the wooden railing.
“It wasn’t really her. It was a woman named Kay Francis.
She’s a white movie star who looks just like Mother Dear.”

There was no difficulty believing that a white movie star
looked like our mother and that Bailey had seen her. He told

me that the movies were changed each week, but when another
picture came to Stamps staring Kay Francis he would tell me
and we’d go together. He even promised to sit with me.

He had stayed late on the previous Saturday to see the film
over again. I understood, and understood too why he couldn’t
tell Momma or Uncle Willie. She was our mother and
belonged to us. She was never mentioned to anyone because
we simply didn’t have enough of her to share.

We had to wait nearly two months before Kay Francis
returned to Stamps. Bailey’s mood had lightened consider-
ably, but he lived in a state of expectation and it made him
more nervous than he was usually. When he told me that the
movie would be shown, we went into our best behavior and
were the exemplary children that Grandmother deserved and
wished to think us.

It was a gay light comedy, and Kay Francis wore long-
sleeved white silk shirts with big cuff links. Her bedroom was
all satin and flowers in vases, and her maid, who was Black,
went around saying “Lawsy, missy” all the time. There was a
Negro chauffeur too, who rolled his eyes and scratched his
head, and I wondered how on earth an idiot like that could be
trusted with her beautiful cars. ,

The whitefolks downstairs laughed every few minutes,
throwing the discarded snicker up to the Negroes in the buz-
zards’ roost. The sound would jag around in our air for an
indecisive second before the balcony’s occupants accepted it
and sent their own guffaws to riot with it against the walls of
the theater.

I laughed, too, but not at the hateful jokes made on my
people. I laughed because, except that she was white, the big
movie star looked just like my mother. Except that she lived
in a big mansion with a thousand servants, she lived just like




my mother. And it was funny to think of the whitefolks’ not
knowing that the woman they were adoring could be my
mother’s twin, except that she was white and my mother was
prettier. Much prettier.

The movie star made me happy. It was extraordinary
good fortune to be able to save up one’s money and go see
one’s mother whenever one wanted to. I bounced out of the
theater as if I'd been given an unexpected present. But Bailey
was cast down again. (I had to beg him not to stay for the next
show.) On the way home he stopped at the railroad track and
waited for the night freight train. Just before it reached the
crossing, he tore out and ran across the tracks.

I was left on the other side in hysteria. Maybe the giant
wheels were grinding his bones into a bloody mush. Maybe he
tried to catch a boxcar and got flung into the pond and
drowned. Or even worse, maybe he caught the train and was
forever gone.

When the train passed he pushed himself away from the
pole where he had been leaning, berated me for making all
that noise and said, “Let’s go home.”

One year later he did catch a freight, but because of his
youth and the inscrutable ways of fate, he didn’t find Cali-
fornia and his Mother Dear—he got stranded in Baton Rouge,
Louisiana, for two weeks.

