CHAPTER 31
Sey



DOLORES was sitting, it seemed, in the same place as the
night before. Her pose was so similar it was hard to believe she
had gone to sleep, eaten breakfast or even patted her firm
hairdo. Dad said sportily, “Hello, kid,” and walked toward
the bathroom. I greeted her: “Hello, Dolores” (we had long
dropped the pretense of familial relationship). She responded,
briefly but politely, and threaded her attention through the
eye of her needle. She was now prudently making cute
kitchen curtains, which would soon starchily oppose the wind.
Having nothing more to say, I went to my room. Within min-
utes an argument ensued in the living area that was as audible
to me as if the separating walls were muslin sheets.

“Bailey, you’ve let your children come between us.”

“Kid, you’re too sensitive. The children, er, my children,
can’t come between us, unless you let them.”

“How can I stop it?’—she was crying—“They’re doing
it.” Then she said, “You gave your daughter your jacket.”

“Was I supposed to let her freeze to death? Is that what
you'd like, kid?” He laughed. “You would, wouldn’t you?”




“Bailey, you know I wanted to like your children, but
they ...” She couldn’t bring herself to describe us.

“Why the hell don’t you say what you mean? You’re a
pretentious little bitch, aren’t you? That’s what Marguerite
called you, and she’s right.”

I shivered to think how that revelation would add to her
iceberg of hate for me.

“Marguerite can go to hell, Bailey Johnson. I’m marrying
you, I don’t want to marry your children.”

“More pity for you, you unlucky sow. I am going out.
Goodnight.”

The front door slammed. Dolores cried quietly and broke
the piteous whimpers with sniffles and a few dainty nose
blows into her handkerchief.

In my room, I thought my father was mean and cruel. He
had enjoyed his Mexican holiday, and still was unable to
proffer a bit of kindness to the woman who had waited
patiently, busying herself with housewifely duties. | was cer-
tain that she knew he’d been drinking, and she must have
noticed that although we were away over twelve hours, we
hadn’t brought one tortilla into the house.

I felt sorry and even a little guilty. I had enjoyed myself,
too. I had been eating chicharrones while she probably sat
praying for his safe return. ] had defeated a car and a moun-
tain as she pondered over my father’s fidelity. There was
nothing fair or kind about the treatment, so I decided to go
out and console her. The idea of spreading mercy, indiscrimi-
nately, or, to be more correct, spreading it on someone I really
didn’t care about, enraptured me. I was basically good. Not
understood, and not even liked, but even so, just, and better
than just. I was merciful. I stood in the center of the floor but
Dolores never looked up. She worked the thread through the

flowered cloth as if she were sewing the torn ends of her life
together. I said, in my Florence Nightingale voice, “Dolores,
I don’t mean to come between you and Dad. I wish you'd
believe me.” There, it was done. My good deed balanced the
rest of the day.

With her head still bent she said, “No one was speaking
to you, Marguerite. It is rude to eavesdrop on other people’s
conversations.”

Surely she wasn’t so dumb as to think these paper walls
were made of marble. I let just the tiniest shred of impudence
enter my voice. “I’ve never eavesdropped in my life. A deaf
person would have been hard put not to hear what you said. I
thought I'd tell you that I have no interest in coming between
you and my father. That’s all.”

My mission had failed and succeeded. She refused to be
pacified, but I had shown myself in a favorable and Christian
light. I turned to go.

“No, that’s not all.” She looked up. Her face was puffy
and her eyes swollen red. “Why don’t you go back to your
mother? If you’ve got one.” Her tone was so subdued she
might have been telling me to cook a pot of rice. If I’ve got
one? Well, I'd tell her. ,

“I’ve got one and she’s worlds better than you, prettier,
too, and intelligent and—”

“And”—her voice keened to a point—“she’s a whore.”
Maybe if I had been older, or had had my mother longer, or
understood Dolores’ frustration more deeply, my response
would not have been so violent. I know that the awful accusa-
tion struck not so much at my filial love as at the foundation of
my new existence. [f there was a chance of truth in the charge,
I would not be able to live, to continue to live with Mother,
and I so wanted to.




I walked to Dolores, enraged at the threat. “I’m going to
slap you for that, you silly old bitch.” I warned her and I
slapped her. She was out of the chair like a flea, and before I
could jump back she had her arms around me. Her hair was
under my chin and she wrapped her arms, it seemed two or
three times, around my waist. I had to push her shoulders
with all my strength to unlock the octopus hold. Neither of us
made a sound until I finally shoved her back onto the sofa.
Then she started screaming. Silly old fool. What did she
expect if she called my mother a whore? I walked out of the
house. On the steps I felt something wet on my arm and
looked down to find blood. Her screams still sailed through
the evening air like skipping stones, but I was bleeding. I
looked carefully on my arm, but there was no cut. I put my
arm back to my waist and it brought fresh blood as I pulled it
away. I was cut. Before I could fully understand, or compre-
hend enough to respond, Dolores opened the door, screaming
still, and upon seeing me, instead of slamming the door she
ran like a mad woman down the stairs. I saw a hammer in her
hand, and without wondering if I would be able to take it
from her, I fled. Dad’s car sat in a yard twice in one day
offering magnificent refuge. I jumped in, rolled up the win-
dows and locked the door. Dolores flitted around the car,

‘screaming like a banshee, her face bedizened with fury.

Daddy Bailey and the neighbors he was visiting responded
to the screams and crowded around her. She shouted that I
had jumped on her and tried to kill her and Bailey had better
not bring me back in the house. I sat in the car, feeling the
blood slip down to my buttocks as the people quieted and
cooled her rage. My father motioned to me to open the
window, and when I did he said he would take Dolores inside
but I should stay in the car. He would be back to attend to me.

The events of the day swarmed over me and made my
breathing difficult. After all the decisive victories of the day
my life was to end in sticky death. If Dad stayed a very long
time in the house, I was too afraid to go to the door and ask for
him, and besides, my feminine training would not allow me to
walk two steps with blood on my dress. As I had always
feared, no, known, the trials had been for nothing. (The dread
of futility has been my life-long plague.) Excitement, appre-
hension, release and anger had drained me of mobility. I
waited for Fate, the string puller, to dictate my movements.

My father came down the steps in a few minutes and
angrily slammed into the car. He sat in a corner of blood and I
gave no warning. He must have been pondering what to do
with me when he felt the damp on his trousers.

“What the hell is this?” He hunched himself up on a hip
and brushed the pants. His hand showed red in the porch’s
cast-off light. “What is this, Marguerite?”

I said with a coldness that would have done him proud,
“T’ve been cut.”

“What do you mean, cut?”

It only lasted a precious minute, but I managed once to see
my father perplexed.

“Cut.” It was so delicious. I didn’t mind draining away
into the plaid seat cushions.

“When? By whom?”

Daddy, even in a critical moment, wouldn’t say “By
who?”

“Dolores cut me.” The economy of words showed my con-
tempt for them all.

“How badly?”

I would have reminded him that I was no doctor and




therefore was ill equipped to do a thorough examination, but
impudence would have diminished my lead.

“T don’t know.”

He put the car in gear, smoothly, and I enviously realized
that although I had driven his car I didn’t know how to drive.

I thought we were en route to an emergency hospital, and
so with serenity I made plans for my death and will. As I
faded into time’s dateless night, I would say to the doctor,
“The moving finger writes and having writ, moves on ...”
and my soul would escape gracefully. Bailey was to have my
books, my Lester Young records and my love from the next
world. I had groggily surrendered myself to oblivion when
the car stopped.

Dad said, “O.K., kid, errer let’s go.”

We were in a strange driveway, and even before I got out
of the car he was on the steps of a typical southern California
ranch-type house. The doorbell chimed, and he beckoned me
up the steps. When the door opened he signaled me to stand
outside. After all, I was dripping, and I could see the living
room was carpeted. Dad went in but didn’t quite close the
door, and a few minutes later a woman called to me in a
whisper from the side of the house. I followed her into a recre-
ation room, and she asked me where I was hurt. She was quiet

and her concern seemed sincere. I pulled off my dress and we

both looked into the open flesh on my side. She was as pleased
as I was disappointed that the edges of the wound had begun
to clot. She washed witch hazel over the rupture and taped me
ughtly with extra-long Band-Aids. Then we went into the
living room. Dad shook hands with the man he’d been talking
to and thanked my emergency nurse and we left.

In the car he explained that the couple were his friends
and he had asked the wife to look at me. He said he told her if

the laceration wasn’t too deep he would be grateful if she
treated it. Otherwise he’d have to take me toa hospital. Could
I imagine the scandal if people found out that his, Bailey
Johnson’s, daughter had been cut by his lady friend? He was
after all a Mason, an Elk, a naval dietician and the first Negro
deacon in the Lutheran church. No Negro in the city would
be able to hold his head up if our misfortune became common
knowledge. While the lady (I never knew her name) dressed
my wound he had telephoned other friends and made arrange-
ments for me to spend the night with them. At another strange
trailer, in yet another mobile park, I was taken in and given
night clothes and a bed. Dad said he’d see me around noon the
next day.

I went to bed and slept as if my death wish had come true.
In the morning neither the empty and unfamiliar surround-
ings nor the stiffness of my side bothered me. I made and ate
a big breakfast and sat down with a slick magazine to wait
for Dad.

At fifteen life had taught me undeniably that surrender, in
its place, was as honorable as resistance, especially if one had
no choice.

When my father came, with a jacket thrown over the
striped cotton uniform he wore as a naval dietician, he asked
how I felt, gave me a dollar and a half and a kiss, and said he’d
drop by late in the evening. He laughed as usual. Nervous?

Alone, I imagined the owners returning to find me in
their house, and realized that I didn’t even remember what
they looked like. How could I bear their contempt or their
pity? If I disappeared Dad would be relieved, not to mention
Dolores. I hesitated nearly too long. What would I do? Did I
have the nerve to commit suicide? If I jumped in the ocean
wouldn’t I come up all bloated like the man Bailey saw in




Stamps? The thought of my brother made me pause. What
would he do? I waited a patience and another patience and
then he ordered me to leave. But don’t kill yourself. You can
always do that if things get bad enough.

I made a few tuna sandwiches, lumpy with pickles, put a
Band-Aid supply in my pocket, counted my money (I had over
three dollars plus some Mexican coins) and walked out. When
I heard the door slam I knew the decision had jelled. I had no
key and nothing on earth would induce me to stand around
until Dad’s friends returned to pityingly let me back in.

Now that I was out free, [ set to thinking of my future.
The obvious solution to my homelessness concerned me only
briefly. I could go home to Mother, but I couldn’t. I could
never succeed in shielding the gash in my side from her. She
was too perceptive not to notice the crusty Band-Aids and my
favoring the wound. And if I failed to hide the wound we
were certain to experience another scene of violence. I
thought of poor Mr. Freeman, and the guilt which lined my

heart, even after all those years, was a nagging passenger in
my mind,

