CHAPTER 27



iN the early months of World War II, San Francisco’s Fill-
more district, or the Western Addition, experienced a visible
revolution. On the surface it appeared to be totally peaceful
and almost a refutation of the term “revolution.” The
Yakamoto Sea Food Market quietly became Sammy’s Shoe
Shine Parlor and Smoke Shop. Yashigira’s Hardware meta-
morphosed into La Salon de Beauté owned by Miss Clorinda
Jackson. The Japanese shops which sold products to Nisei cus-
tomers were taken over by enterprising Negro businessmen,
and in less than a year became permanent homes away from
home for the newly arrived Southern Blacks. Where the odors
of tempura, raw fish and cha had dominated, the aroma of
chitlings, greens and ham hocks now prevailed,

The Asian population dwindled before my eyes. I was
unable to tell the Japanese from the Chinese and as yet found
no real difference in the national origin of such sounds as
Ching and Chan or Moto and Kano.

As the Japanese disappeared, soundlessly and without
protest, the Negroes entered with their loud jukeboxes,




their just-released animosities and the relief of escape from
Southern bonds. The Japanese area became San Francisco's
Harlem in a matter of months.

A person unaware of all the factors that make up oppres-
sion might have expected sympathy or even support from the
Negro newcomers for the dislodged Japanese. Especially in
view of the fact that they (the Blacks) had themselves under-
gone concentration-camp living for centuries in slavery’s
plantations and later in sharecroppers’ cabins. But the sensa-
tions of common relationship were missing.

The Black newcomer had been recruited on the desiccated
farm lands of Georgia and Mississippi by war-plant labor
scouts. The chance to live in two- or three-story apartment
buildings (which became instant slums), and to earn two- and
even three-figured weekly checks, was blinding. For the first
time he could think of himself as a Boss, a Spender. He was
able to pay other people to work for him, i.e. the dry cleaners,
taxi drivers, waitresses, etc. The shipyards and ammunition
plants brought to booming life by the war let him know that
he was needed and even appreciated. A completely alien yet
very pleasant position for him to experience. Who could
expect this man to share his new and dizzying importance
with concern for a race that he had never known to exist?

Another reason for his indifference to the Japanese
removal was more subtle but was more profoundly felt. The
Japanese were not whitefolks. Their eyes, language and cus-
toms belied the white skin and proved to their dark successors
that since they didn’t have to be feared, neither did they have
to be considered. All this was decided unconsciously.

No member of my family and none of the family friends
ever mentioned the absent Japanese. It was as if they had never
owned or lived in the houses we inhabited. On Post Street,

where our house was, the hill skidded slowly down to Fill-
more, the market heart of our district. In the two short blocks
before it reached its destination, the street housed two day-
and-night restaurants, two pool halls, four Chinese restaurants,
two gambling houses, plus diners, shoeshine shops, beauty
salons, barber shops and at least four churches. To fully grasp
the never-ending activity in San Francisco’s Negro neighbor-
hood during the war, one need only know that the two blocks
described were side streets that were duplicated many times
over in the eight- to ten-square-block area.

The air of collective displacement, the impermanence of
life in wartime and the gauche personalities of the more recent
arrivals tended to dissipate my own sense of not belonging. In
San Francisco, for the first time, I perceived myself as part of
something. Not that I identified with the newcomers, nor
with the rare Black descendants of native San Franciscans,
nor with the whites or even the Asians, but rather with the
times and the city. I understood the arrogance of the young
sailors who marched the streets in marauding gangs,
approaching every girl as if she were at best a prostitute and at
worst an Axis agent bent on making the U.S.A. lose the war.
The undertone of fear that San Francisco would be bombed
which was abetted by weekly air raid warnings, and civil
defense drills in school, heightened my sense of belonging.
Hadn't I, always, but ever and ever, thought that life was just
one great risk for the living?

Then the city acted in wartime like an intelligent woman
under siege. She gave what she couldn’t with safety withhold,
and secured those things which lay in her reach. The city
became for me the ideal of what I wanted to be as a grownup.
Friendly but never gushing, cool but not frigid or distant, dis-
tinguished without the awful stiffness.




To San Franciscans “the City That Knows How” was the
Bay, the fog, Sir Francis Drake Hotel, Top o’ the Mark,
Chinatown, the Sunset District and so on and so forth and so
white. To me, a thirteen-year-old Black girl, stalled by the
South and Southern Black life style, the city was a state of
beauty and a state of freedom. The fog wasn’t simply the
steamy vapors off the bay caught and penned in by hills, but a
soft breath of anonymity that shrouded and cushioned the
bashful traveler. I became dauntless and free of fears, intoxi-
cated by the physical fact of San Francisco. Safe in my pro-
tecting arrogance, I was certain that no one loved her as
impartially as I. I walked around the Mark Hopkins and
gazed at the Top o’ the Mark, but (maybe sour grapes) was
more impressed by the view of Oakland from the hill than
by the tiered building or its fur-draped visitors. For weeks,
after the city and I came to terms about my belonging, I
haunted the points of interest and found them empty and un-
San Francisco. The naval officers with their well-dressed
wives and clean white babies inhabited another time-space
dimension than I. The well-kept old women in chauffeured
cars and blond girls in buckskin shoes and cashmere sweaters
might have been San Franciscans, but they were at most gilt
on the frame of my portrait of the city.

Pride and Prejudice stalked in tandem the beautiful hills.
Native San Franciscans, possessive of the city, had to cope
with an influx, not of awed respectful tourists but of raucous
unsophisticated provincials. They were also forced to live with
skin-deep guilt brought on by the treatment of their former
Nisei schoolmates.

Southern white illiterates brought their biases intact to the
West from the hills of Arkansas and the swamps of Georgia.
The Black ex-farmers had not left their distrust and fear of

whites which history had taught them in distressful lessons.
These two groups were obliged to work side by side in the
war plants, and their animosities festered and opened like
boils on the face of the city.

San Franciscans would have sworn on the Golden Gate
Bridge that racism was missing from the heart of their air-
conditioned city. But they would have been sadly mistaken.

A story went the rounds about a San Franciscan white
matron who refused to sit beside a Negro civilian on the
streetcar, even after he made room for her on the seat. Her
explanation was that she would not sit beside a draft dodger
who was a Negro as well. She added that the least he could do
was fight for his country the way her son was fighting on Iwo
Jima. The story said that the man pulled his body away from
the window to show an armless sleeve. He said quietly and
with great dignity, “Then ask your son to look around for my
arm, which I left over there.”



